"","x"
"1","Prince ARTHUR. An Heroick POEM. In Ten Books. BY RICHARD BLACKMORE, M. D. AND Fellow of the College of Physitians in London. 
      LONDON: Printed for Awnsham and Iohn Churchil at the black swan in Pater-Noster-Row, MDCXCV. "
"2","THE PREFACE. TO what ill purposes soever Poetry has been abused, its true and genuine End is by universal Confession, the Instruction of our Minds, and Regulation of our Manners; for which 'tis furnished with so many excellent Advantages. The Delicacy of its strains, the sweetness and Harmony of its Numbers, the lively and admirable manner of its Painting or Representation, and the wonderful Force of its Eloquence, cannot but open the Passages to our Breasts, triumph over our Passions, and leave behind them very deep Impressions. 'Tis in the power of Poetry to insinuate into the inmost Recesses of the Mind, to touch any spring that moves the Heart, to agitate the soul with any sort of Affection, and transform it into any shape or Posture it thinks fit. 'Tis therefore no wonder that so wise a state, as that of Athens, should retain the Poets on the side of Religion and the Government. The stage there was set up to teach the People the scheme of their Religion, and those Modes of Worship the Government thought fit to encourage, to convey to them such Ideas of their Deities, and Divine Providence, as might engage their Minds to a Reverence of superiour, invisible Beings, and to observe and admire their Administration of humane Affairs. The Poets were looked on as Divine, not only upon the account of that extraordinary Fury and Heat of Imagination, wherewith they were thought to be inspired, but likewise upon the account of their Profession and Imployment, their Business being to represent

        Vice as the most odious, and Virtue as the most desirable thing in the World. Tragedy was at its first Institution a part of the Ancient Pagans Divine service, when the Chorus which originally was so great a part, contained many excellent Lessons of Piety and Morality, and was wholly imploied in rectifying their mistakes about the Gods, and their Government of the World, in moderating their Passions, and purging their Minds from Vice and Corruption. This was the noble Design of the Chorus. And the Representation of great and illustrious Characters, gradually afterwards introduced, their Impious, or their Generous Actions, and the different Event that attended them, was to deter Men from Vice and Impiety, and encourage them to be Generous and Virtuous, by shewing them the Vengeance that at last overtook the one, and the Rewards and Praises that crowned the other. The End of Comedy was the same, but pursued in another way. The business of Comedy being to render Vice ridiculous, to expose it to publick Derision and Contempt, and to make Men ashamed of Vile and sordid Actions. Tragedy designed to scare Men, Comedy to Laugh them out of their Vices. And 'tis very plain, that satyr is intended for the same End, the Promotion of Virtue, and exposing of Vice; which it pursues by sharp Reproaches, vehement and bitter Invectives, or by a Courtly, but not less cutting Raillery. The Odes of the Lyric Poet were chiefly designed for the Praises of their Gods, their Heroes and extraordinary Persons, to draw Men to an Admiration and Imitation of them. But above all other kinds, Epick Poetry, as it is first in Dignity, so it mostly conduces to this End. 

In an Epick Poem, where Characters of the first Rank and Dignity, Illustrious for their Birth or high Employment are introduced, the Fable, the Action, the particular Episodes are so contrived and conducted, or at least ought to be, that either Fortitude, Wisdom, Piety, Moderation, Generosity, some or other Noble and Princely Virtues shall be recommended with the highest Advantage, and their contrary Vices made as odious. To give Men right and just Conceptions of Religion and Virtue, to aid their Reason in restraining their Exorbitant Appetites and Impetuous Passions, and to bring their Lives under the Rules and Guidance of true Wisdom, and thereby to promote the publick Good of Mankind, is undoubtedly the End of all Poetry. 'Tis true indeed, that one End of Poetry is to give Men Pleasure and Delight; but this is but a subordinate, subaltern End, which is it self a Means to the greater, and ultimate one before mentioned. A Poet should imploy all his Iudgment and Wit, exhaust all the Riches of his Fancy, and abound in Beautiful and Noble Expression, to divert and entertain others; but then it must be with this Prospect, that he may hereby engage their Attention, insinuate more easily into their Minds, and more effectually convey to them wise Instructions. 'Tis below the Dignity of a true Poet to take his Aim at any inferiour End. They are Men of little Genius, of mean and poor Design, that imploy their Wit for no higher Purpose, than to please the Imagination of vain and wanton People. I think these Poets, if they must be called so, whose Wit as they manage it, is altogether unuseful are justly reproached; but I am sure those others are highly to be condemned, who use all their Wit in Opposition to

Religion, and to the Destruction of Virtue and good Manners in the World. There have been in all Ages such ill Men that have perverted the right Vse of Poetry, but never so many, or so bold or mischievous as in ours. Our Poets seem engaged in a general Con'federacy to ruin the End of their own Art, to expose Religion and Virtue, and bring Vice and Corruption of Manners into Esteem and Reputation. The Poets that write for the stage (at least a great part of 'em) seem deeply concerned in this Conspiracy. These are the Champions that charge Religion with such desperate Resolution, and have given it so many deep and ghastly Wounds. The stage was an Outwork or Fort raised for the Protection and security of the Temple, but the Poets that kept it, have revolted, and basely betraied it, and what is worse, have turned all their Force and discharged all their Artillery against the Place their Duty was to defend. If any Man thinks this an unjust Charge, I desire him to read any of our modern Comedies, and I believe he will soon be convinced of the Truth of what I have said. The Man of sense and the Fine Gentleman in the Comedy, who as the chiefest Person proposed to the Esteem and Imitation of the Audience, is enriched with all the sense and Wit the Poet can bestow; this Extraordinary Person you will find to be a Derider of Religion, a great Admirer of Lucretius, not so much for his Learning, as his Irreligion, a Person wholly Idle, dissolved in Luxury, abandoned to his Pleasures, a great Debaucher of Women, profuse and extravagant in his Expences, and in short, this Finished Gentleman will appear a Finished Libertine. 
      The Young Lady that must support the Character of a Vertuous, Well-mannered sensible Woman, the most

perfect Creature that can be, and the very Flower of her sex, this Accomplished Person entertains the Audience with confident Discourses, immodest Repartees, and prophane Raillery. she is throughly instructed in Intreagues and Assignations, a great scoffer at the prudent Reservedness and Modesty of the best of her sex, she despises the wise Instructions of her Parents or Guardians, is disobedient to their Authority, and at last, without their Knowledge or Consent, marries her self to the Fine Gentleman above mentioned. And can any one imagine, but that our Young Ladies and Gentlemen are admirably instructed by such Patterns of sense and Virtue? If a Clergy-man be introduced, as he often is, 'tis seldome for any other purpose, but to abuse him, to expose his very Character and Profession: He must be a Pimp, a Blockhead, a Hypocrite; some wretched Figure he must make, and almost ever be so managed, as to bring his very Order into Contempt. This indeed is a very common, but yet so gross an Abuse of Wit, as was never endured on a Pagan Theater, at least in the ancient, primitive Times of Poetry, before its Purity and simplicity became corrupted with the Inventions of after Ages. Poets then taught Men to reverence their Gods, and those who served them. None had so little Regard for his Religion, as to expose it publickly, or if any had, their Governments were too wise to suffer the Worship of their Gods to be treated on the stage with Contempt. 
      In our Comedies the Wives of Citizens are highly encouraged to despise their Husbands, and to make great Friendship with some such Vertuous Gentleman
        
and Man of sense as is above described. This is their Way of recommending Chastity and Fidelity. And that Diligence and Frugality may be sufficiently exposed, tho' the two Virtues that chiefly support the Being of any state, to deter Men from being Industrious and Wealthy, the Diligent, Thriving Citizen is made the most Wretched, Contemptible Thing in the World: and as the Alderman that makes the best Figure in the City, makes the worst on the stage, so under the Character of a Justice of Peace, you have all the Prudence and Virtues of the Country most unmercifully insulted over. And as these Characters are set up on purpose to ruin all Opinion and Esteem of Virtue, so the Conduct throughout, the Language, the Fable and Contrivance seem evidently designed for the same Noble End. There are few Fine Conceipts, few strains of Wit or extraordinary Pieces of Raillery, but are either immodest or irreligious, and very few scenes but have some spiteful and envious stroke at sobriety and Good Manners, whence the Youth of the Nation have apparently received very bad Impressions. The universal Corruption of Manners and irreligious Disposition of Mind that infects the Kingdom, seems to have been in a great Measure derived from the stage, or has at least been highly promoted by it. And 'tis great Pitty that those in whose Power it is, have not yet restrained the Licentiousness of it, and obliged the Writers to observe more Decorum. It were to be wished that Poets, as Preachers are in some Countries, were paid and licensed by the state, and that none were suffered to write in Prejudice of Religion and the Government, but that all such Offenders,

as publick Enemies of Mankind should be silenced and duly punished. sure some Effectual Care should be taken that these Men might not be suffered by Debauching our Youth, to help on the Destruction of a brave Nation. some of these Poets, to excuse their Guilt, alledge for themselves, that the Degeneracy of the Age makes their leud way of Writing necessary; they pretend the Auditors will not be pleased, unless they are thus entertained from the stage; and to please they say is the chief business of the Poet. But this is by no means a just Apology; 'tis not true, as was said before, that the Poet's chief business is to please. His chief business is to instruct, to make Mankind Wiser and Better; and in order to this, his Care should be to please and entertain the Audience with all the Wit and Art, he is Master of. Aristotle and Horace, and all their Criticks and Commentators, all Men of Wit and sense agree, that this is the End of Poetry. But they say 'tis their Profession to Write for the stage; and that Poets must starve if they will not in this way humour the Audience. The Theater will be as unfrequented, as the Churches, and the Poet and the Parson equally neglected. Let the Poet then abandon his Profession, and take up some honest, lawful Calling, where joyning Industry to his great Wit, he may soon get above the Complaints of Poverty, so common among these ingenious Men, and lye under no necessity of prostituting his Wit to any such vile Purposes as are here censured. This will be a course of Life more Profitable and Honourable to himself, and more useful to others. And there are among these Writers some, who think they might have risen to the highest Dignities in other Professions, had they imploied their Wit in those Ways. 

'Tis a mighty Dishonour and Reproach to any Man, that is capable of being useful to the World in any Liberal and Virtuous Profession, to lavish out his Life and Wit in propagating Vice and Corruption of Manners, and in battering from the stage the strongest Entrenchments and best Works of Religion and Virtue. Whoever makes this his Choice, when the other was in his Power, may he go off the stage unpitied, complaining of Neglect and Poverty, the just Punishments of his Irreligion and Folly. 
      'Tis no dishonour to be a true Poet, if indeed a Man be one; that is, a noble Genius well cultivated, and emploied in Writing in such a way, as reaches the End of his Art, and by discouraging Vice, promotes the Good of Mankind. But 'tis a mighty Dishonour and shame, to employ excellent Faculties and abundance of Wit, to humour and please Men in their Vices and Follies. such a one is more hateful, as an ill Man, than valuable, as a good Poet. The great Enemy of Mankind, notwithstanding his Wit and Angelick Faculties, is the most odious Being of the whole Creation. Nor is this Abuse confined to the stage▪ the same strain runs thro' the other kinds of Poetry. What monstrous leud and irreligious Books of Poems, as they are called, have been of late days published, and what is the greater wonder, received in a Civilized and Christian Kingdom, with Applause and Reputation? The sweetness of the Wit, makes the Poison go down with Pleasure, and the Contagion spreads without Opposition. Young Gentlemen and Ladies are generally pleasd and diverted with Poetry, more than by any other way of Writing; but there are few Poems they can fix on, but they are like to pay too dear for their Entertainment. Their Fancies are like to be filled with impure Ideas,
        
and their Minds engaged in hurtful Passions, which are the more lasting, by being conveied in lively Expressions, and all the Address of an artful Poet. For this End among others, I undertook the writing of this Poem, hoping I might be able to please and entertain, not only without hurting the Reader, but to his advantage. I was willing to make one Effort towards the rescuing the Muses out of the hands of these Ravishers, to restore them to their sweet and chast Mansions, and to engage them in an Employment suitable to their Dignity. If I succeed not my self in this good Design, I hope at least I shall awaken the Courage and Compassion of some other brave Adventurers, that may more happily attempt this honorable Work. To write an Epick Poem is a work of that Difficulty, that no one for near seventeen hundred years past has succeeded in it; and only those two great Wits Homer and Virgil before. That the modern Poets have been so unsuccessful, has not, I imagin, proceeded so much from want of Genius, as from their Ignorance of the Rules of writing such a Poem; or at least, from their want of attending to them. Tho' Aristotle's excellent Rules of Poetry were early published by Victorius at Florence, and soon after farther illustrated by the Comments of several Italian Criticks, yet we do not find that Ariosto or Tasso either, were very careful to observe them. And indeed our modern Writers neither seem to have attended to those incomparable Rules, nor carefully to have considered the great Models that Homer and Virgil had left them. some Readers that are not versed in this matter, imagin every thing written in Heroick Verse, is an Heroick Poem; but these have not considered the Nature of such a Work, nor looked into the Criticks, who have written

on this subject. I shall therefore give the Definition of an Epick or Heroick Poem, that those that have it not already, may now have a true Idea of its Nature. An Epick Poem is a feigned or devised story of an Illustrious Action, related in Verse, in an Allegorical, Probable, Delightful and Admirable manner, to cultivate the Mind with Instructions of Virtue. 'Tis a feigned or devised Discourse; that is, a Fable; and so it agrees with Tragedy and Comedy. The word Fable at first signified indifferently a true or false story, therefore Cicero for distinction, uses Fictas Fabulas in his Book de Finibus. But afterwards Custom obtained to use the word always for a feigned Discourse. And in the first Ages, especially in the Eastern World, great use was made by Learned and Wise Men of these feigned Discourses, Fables or Apologues, to teach the ruder and more unpolished Part of Mankind. Theologians, Philosophers, and great Law-givers, every where fell into this way of instructing and cultivating the People in the Knowledge of Religion, Natural Philosophy, and Moral and Political Virtues. so Thales, Orpheus, solon, Homer, and the rest of the great Men in those Ages have done, and the famous Philosopher socrates is by some affirmed to be the Author of many of the Fables that pass under Aesop's name. Most of them made their Fables in Verse, that by the addition of Harmony and Numbers they might the better attain their End. strabo and Plutarch greatly commend this way of teaching the People; and these Reasons may be given for the usefulness of it. Naked Philosophical Precepts and Doctrines are of themselves harsh and dry, hardly attended to, and ungratefully entertained. If the Hearers are rude and course, or very vicious, there is no hope of gaining them by a

        grave and solemn Discourse of Virtue, and even the better and more civilized Auditors are hardly kept attentive to it. Man is naturally a lover of Pleasure, and if you would do him Good, it must be, by pleasing him; you must give him Delight, and keep his Mind in a constant agreeable Agitation, else he will not attend to the most useful Counsel and Instruction. He is pleased already with the Notions and Habitudes, howsoever false or vicious, that have the present Possession of him, and you must give him a great deal of Pleasure and Entertainment to engage him to hear you, when you would perswade him to the trouble, of becoming Wiser and Better. Now the first Wise Men that undertook to civilize and polish the barbarous World, found this way of Fables especially in Verse, to be mighty Acceptable to the People: The Contrivance gave them Delight, and the Novelty raised their Admiration. They could learn them perfectly, and repeat them often, by which means the Instructions of Virtue covertly contained in them, were inculcated on their Minds. And we find, that many Ages after Orpheus, solon, Homer, &c. the Divine Law-giver of the Christians thought fit to teach the People by Apologues, Parables or Fables, under which he covered and disguised his Heavenly Instructions. The Action must be Illustrious and Important; Illustrious in respect of the Person, who is the Author of it, who is always some Valiant, or Wise, or Pious Prince or great Commander: But let his Character be what it will in other respects (for there is no Necessity the Hero should be a good or a wise Person) 'tis always necessary he should have Courage; which single Quality is sufficient to make the Hero. And the

Action must be important, both in respect of its Object and its End. 'Tis the Action of some great Person, about some noble and weighty Affair. 'Tis true, there are many other Persons concerned, but tis the Action of the chief Person that gives the Being and Denomination to the Poem. This Action must be but one; when it ceases, the Poem is ended; and if it be revived, and taken up again, 'tis a new Poem begins. Action is Motion; and if it ceases cannot be revived, so as to be numerically the same. There are indeed many other Actions besides the Principal one, but they all depend on, and have relation to that which is Principal, with the Unity of which, the Unity of the Poem stands or falls. If this principal Action be broken, the Poem is broken too, if there be any other Action coordinate and independent on this, the Poem is monstrous, and has as many Heads, as there are found independent Actions. The Narration therefore of many Actions successively of one great Person, or the History of his Life related in Verse, is by no means an Heroick Poem, any one great Action being sufficient for that. That which makes the Unity of the Action, is the regular succession of one Part or Episode to another, not only as Antecedents and Consequents, but as it were Causes and Effects, wherein the Reader may discern that the former Episode makes the following necessary, and the Connection between them is such, that they assist and support each other, as the Members of the Body do, no Episode being out of its place, of a disproportioned size to the Rest, or that could be spared from its place, without maiming, or at least deforming the Whole. If this order of the Episodes be preserved, and there appears none but what naturally and probably results from the principal Action, then the Action may be looked on as one. The Action must be related in an Allegorical manner; and this Rule is best observed, when as Divines speak; there is both a Literal sense obvious to every Reader, and that gives him satisfaction enough if he sees no farther; and besides another Mystical or Typical sense, not hard to be discovered by those Readers that penetrate the matter deeper. Virgil seems most happy in this Conduct, whose Poem all along contains this double sense, Homer has often only an Allegorical sense without the Literal, and therefore is not so well accommodated to this Age, as he was not to that of Augustus. But Ariosto and spencer, however great Wits, not observing this judicious Conduct of Virgil, nor attending to any sober Rules, are hurried on with a boundless, impetuous Fancy over Hill and Dale, till they are both lost in a Wood of Allegories. Allegories so wild, unnatura
l, and extravagant, as greatly displease the Reader. This way of writing mightily offends in this Age; and 'tis a wonder how it came to please in any. There is indeed a way of writing purely Allegorical, as when Vices and Virtues are introduced as Persons, the first as Furies, the other as Divine Persons or Goddesses, which still obtains, and is well enough accommodated to the present Age. For the Allegory is presently discerned, and the Reader is by no means imposed on, but sees it immediately to be an Allegory, and is both delighted and instructed with it. The devised story must be related in a probable manner; without this all things will be harsh, unnatural, and monstrous; and consequently most odious and offensive to the Iudicious. Probability must be in the Action, the Conduct, the Manners; and where humane means cannot, Machine
s are introduced to support it. Nothing is more necessary

then Probability; no Rule more chastly to be observed. An Epick Poem must likewise be delightful and admirable; and to make it so, must concur sublime Thoughts, clear and noble Expression, Purity of Language, a just and due Proportion, Relation, and Dependance between the Parts, and a beautiful and regular structure and Connection discernable in the Whole. Without these it will not be capable of giving Delight, or raising Admiration. Admiration is the Formal Object of an Epick Poem, nothing is to be admitted there, but as it is admirable; and by this it is discriminated from all other sorts of Poetry. Every kind endeavours to please and delight, but this only attempts to please by astonishing and amazing the Reader. In an Epick Poem every thing should appear great and wonderful, the Thoughts cannot be too much Elevated, the Episodes too Noble, the Expression too Magnificent, nor the Action too Wonderful and surprising, if Probability be preserved. No Riches of Fancy, no Pomp of Eloquence can be laid out too much on such a Work where the Design is throughout to raise our Admiration. To render the Action the more Admirable, Homer and Virgil have introduced the Gods, and engaged them every where as Parties; and tho' I cannot say this is Essential and Necessary to an Epick Poem, yet 'tis evident, that interesting Heaven and Hell in the matter, does mightily raise the subject, and makes the Action appear more wonderful. The Pagan Poets had in this a great advantage, their Theology was such, as would easily mix it self with their Poems, from whence they received their greatest Beauties. Homer indeed to raise his subject by his frequent Machines, seems to have debased his Religion. Virgil's Conduct, in my Opinion, is more careful

and chast. But some of our modern Criticks have believed 'tis scarce possible for a Christian Poet to make use of this advantage, of introducing superiour, Indivisible Powers into the Action, and therefore seem to despair of seeing an Heroick Poem written now, that shall reach to the Dignity of those of the Pagans. They think the Christian Religion is not so well accommodated to this matter, as the Pagan was; and that if any Attempt be made this way, Religion will suffer more, than the Poem will gain by it. My Opinion has always differed from these Gentlemen's, I believe a Christian Poet has as great advantages as the Pagan had; and that our Theology may enter into an Epick Poem, and raise the subject without being it self debased. And this indeed was a second Reason why I undertook this Work, so full of Difficulty and Hazard. I was willing to give an Instance wherein it might appear, that the Assertion I have advanced, is actually true. In the Definition which I have given of an Heroick Poem, according to the sense and Iudgment of the best Criticks, I have said, its End is to convey some Instruction of Virtue. But of this, I have discoursed at large at the beginning of this Preface, and there is no need of repeating it. 'Tis not for me to proceed to Censure other Mens Performances of this Kind; whoever will be at the Pains to read the Commentators on Aristotle, and Horace's Rules of Poetry; or that will but carefully consider Rapin, Dacier, and Bossu, those great Masters among the French, and the Iudicious Remarks of our own excellent Critick Mr. Rymer, who seems to have better considered these matters, and to have seen farther into them, than any of the English Nation; will be soon able to see wherein the Heroick Poems that

have been published since Virgil by the Italian, French, and English Wits have been defective, by comparing them with the Rules of Writing set down by those great Masters. Whether I have succeeded better, must be left to the determination of the Iudicious Reader. In this Work I have endeavoured mostly to form my self on Virgil's Model, which I look on, as the most just and perfect, and which is most easily accommodated to the present Age, supposing the Christian Religion in the place of the Pagan. I do not make any Apology for my Imitation of Virgil in so many places of this Poem; for the same great Master has imitated Homer as frequently and closely; and I do not find that any of his Criticks have condemned him for his doing so. Nor is it at all improbable, but that the Greek Poet himself imitated his Predecessors of the same Nation, tho' no doubt he wonderfully improved their Model. Homer was not the first Writer of an Epick Poem. We find Aristotle in his Book of the Art of Poetry, makes mention of several before him: He tells us of an Epick Poem, intituled, The Little Ilias, and another the Cyprica; and censures them both, as containing many perfect, distinct, and independent Actions. The last of these Poems is likewise mentioned by Herodotus in Euterpe, by Athenaeus and Pausanias. And 'tis likely many more such Poems were written before Homer's time, who might be well supposed to have imitated them in what they had done well, as well as to have improved them in avoiding many of their Errors. What Homer and Virgil have performed with Honour and universal Applause, I have attempted: What they have been able, I have been willing to do. If I have not succeeded, my disappointment will be the less,

in that Poetry has been so far from being my Business and Profession, that it has imploied but a small part of my Time; and then, but as my Recreation, and the Entertainment of my idle hours. If this Attempt succeeds so far, as to excite some other Person that has a noble Genius, Leisure, and Application, to Honour his Country with a just Epick Poem, I shall think the Vacancies and Intervals that for about two years past, I have had from the Business of my Profession; which notwithstanding was then greater then at any time before, have been very well imploied. "
"3","Books lately Printed for, and sold by A. & J. Churchil, at the Black swan in Pater-Noster-Row. 
      A View of Universal History, from the Creation to the Year of Christ 1695. wherein the most memorable Persons and Things in the known Kingdoms and Countries of the World, are set down in several Columns by way of synchronism, according to their proper Centuries and Years: By Francis Tallents, sometime Fellow of Magdalen College, Cambridge. The whole graven in 16 Copper-plates, each 15 Inches deep, and 22 broad; bound up into Books, the sheets lined. A Work of great Exactness and Curiosity. Price 16 s. 
      Camden's Britannia, newly Translated into English, with large Additions and Improvements. By Edmund Gibson of Queens College in Cambridge. 
      The General History of the Air. By Robert Boyle, 
        Esq
      A Compleat Journal of the Votes, speeches and Debates, both of the House of Lords and House of Commons, throughout the whole Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Collected by sir simonds Dewes Baronet, and Published by Paul Bowes of the Middle-Temple, Esq The second Edition. The Works of the famous Nicholas Machiavel, Citizen and secretary of Florence. Written Originally in Italian, and from thence faithfully Translated into English. Mr. Lock's Essay concerning Humane Understanding. The second Edition, with large Additions. — his Thoughts of Education, 8o. The Fables of Aesop and other Mithologists; made English by sir Roger L'Estrange, Kt. Fol. Two Treatises of Government: The first an Answer to Filmer's Patriarchae. The latter an Essay concerning the true Original, Extent, and End of Civil Government, 8o. Notitia Monastica, or a short History of the Religious Houses in England and Wales, &c. By Thomas Tanner, A. B. The Resurrection of the (same) Body asserted from the Traditions of the Heathens, the Ancient Jews, and the Primitive Church: With an Answer to the Objections brought against it. By Humphry Hody, D. D. Bishop Wilkins of Prayer and Preaching; Enlarged by the Bishop of Norwich, and Dr. Williams, 8o. Considerations about lowering the Interest, and raising the Value of Money, 8o. short Observations on a Printed Paper, intituled, For encouraging the Coining salver Money in England, and after for keeping it here. 
      sir William Temple's History of the Netherlands, 8o. — Miscellanea, 8o. Dr. Gibson's Anatomy of Humane Bodies, with Additions, 8o. Dr. Patrick's new Version of all the Psalms of David in Metre, 12o. Mr. L'Clerc Logica, 12o. Two Treatises of Rational Religion, 8o. Gentleman's Religion, with the Grounds and Reasons of it. In which the Truth of Christianity in general is vindicated; its simplicity asserted; and some Introductory Rules for the discovering of its particular Doctrines and Precepts, are proposed. By a private Gentleman. In the Press. Leland de Viris illustratibus, and Boston of Bury, from the Mss. with large Improvements; and a Continuation. By Mr. Tanner. 
      sir Richard Baker's Chronicle of the Kings of England, continued down to this time. Cambridge Concordance, Fol. "
"4","ERRATA. PAge 14. line 12. read Dominions, p. 16. l. 25. r. Armoric, p. 17. l. 10. r. mingled, p. 46. l. 3. r. Emanations, p 50. l. 1. r. roll, p. 54. l. 20. r. brighter, p 58. l. 19. r. unexampled, p. 62. l. 9. r. gilded, and dele had, l. 20. r. drawn, p. 63. l. 32. dele with Joy, p. 65. l. 6. r. Conversation, p. 66. l. 13. r. ly, p. 66. l. 14. r. Bank, p. 68. l. 1. r. sphears, p. 84. l. 31. r. they're, p. 85. l. 9. r. Illusions, p. 114. l. 22. r. bloody, p. 137. l. 19. r. Oblivion, l. 17. r. Naphtha, p. 147. l. 11. r. Northumbrian, p. 161. l. 9. r. Meridoc, ib. l. r. Ordovician, p. 165. l. 27. r. great, p. 167. l. 29. r. Osron, p. 169. l. 22. r. Turbulent, p. 175. l. 7. r. Titullan, p. 177. l. 25. r. Maximius, p. 177. l. 30. r. rise, p. 171. l. 13. r. Earthquakes, p. 178. l. 23. r. Decree, p. 185. l. 22. r. in, p. 188. l. 21. r. Land, l. 23. r. this, , p. 189. l. 19. r. sharp'ning, p. 213. l. 27. r. Daughters, p. 218. l. 24. r. from, p. 224. l. 21. r. stooped, p. 236. l. 19. r. spacious, p. 242. l. 18. r. Princes generous, p. 249. l. 8. r. trailed backwards, p. 251. l. 20. r. of, p. 252. l. 16. r. they, p. 264. l. 13. r. Picti, p. 275, l. 32. r. blow, p. 294. l. 13. r. into, p. 294. l. 17. r. upon. "
"5","Prince Arthur. BOOK I. I sing the Briton, and his Righteous Arms,Who bred to suff'rings, and the rude AlarmsOf bloody War, forsook his Native soil,And long sustained a vast Heroick Toil,Till kinder Fate invited his Return,To bless the Isle, that did his Absence mourn:To re-enthrone fair Liberty, and breakThe saxon Yoke, that galled Britannia's Neck. Tell, sacred Muse, what made th' Infernal KingUse all his Arts, and all his Forces bringThe Generous Briton's Triumphs to oppose,Afflict his Friends, and aid his cruel Foes. Tell, why the angry powers below, combineT' oppress a Valiant Prince, and thwart his brave Design. Ambitious Lucifer, deposed of lateFrom Bliss Divine, and high Angelick state,sinks to the dark, unbottomed Deep of Hell,Where sin, and Death, and endless sorrow dwell:Here plunged in Flame, and tortured with DespairHe plots Revenge, and meditates new War. His Thoughts on deep Designs th' Apostate spent,When this Conjuncture favoured his Intent. A spacious, dusky Plain lay wast and void,Where yet Creating Power was ne'er emploiedTo fashion Elements, or strike out Light;The silent, lonesome Walks of ancient Night. In th' Archives kept in heaven's bright Towers, was found,A sacred old Decree, wherein the GroundWas set distinctly out, from Ages past,For a new World, on this unbounded Wast. Here did th' Artificer Divine of late,The World so long before markt out, create. And gave it to the Man he newly made,Where all things him, as he did heaven, obeied. In Eden's Walks he made his blest Abode,All full of Joy, of Glory, full of God. 
        Nature with vast Profusion on him pours,Unmeasured Bliss, from unexhausted stores. Th' Apostate raging at his own DefeatAnd envying this new Prince his happy seat;Labours to win him to his side, to bearArms against heaven, and wage Confed'rate War. Nor did his Arts in vain weak Man assail,His false seraphick Tongue, and Charms prevail. Deluded Man from his high station fellDeserting heaven, to serve the Cause of Hell. This Fatal Conquest o'er fall'n Adam gained,A mighty Empire Lucifer maintained;Till the blest Prince of Peace, heaven's Lord and Heir,By Pity's Tears, and charming Mercy's PrayerDrawn down from heaven, freed lost Mankind, and brokeThe power of Hell, and sin's Tyrannick Yoke. He makes Proud Lucifer his Host disband,And wrests the scepter from th' Usurper's Hand. The Prince of Darkness owns the Conquerour,And yields his Empire to a mightier power. From Idols and their Priests the Nations freed,Celestial Light, and Truth Divine succeed. Religion large Dominions soon obtained,And daily Conquests, and fresh Laurels gained. To Albion's shore she early passed the Main,And brought along her bright Etherial Train. From thence she chased Infernal shades away,And o'er the Isle, diffused a heavenly Day. The Prince of Hell at her Appearance flies,spoiled of his Altars, and his Votaries. Confined to Barb'rous Northern Lands he staid,Till the fierce saxon, Albion did invade. Victorious Octa who his shrines adored,Rebuilt his Altars, and his Groves restored. Long abdicated Gods make Albion mourn,At theirs, and their devouring Priests Return. Th' Arch-Traytor's Rage hence against Arthur rose,And all th' Infernal powers his Arms oppose;Conscious should he his glorious End acquire,And force th' intruding Pagan to retire,Theirs, with the saxon Empire must expire. They must again forsake fair Albion's Land,And leave Divine Religion to Command. scarce had they left the happy Neustrian Coast,Born with a Prosperous Gale, scarce had they lostThe Tops of spires, and rising Points of Land,When Lucifer, that did observing standOn the high southern Promontory's Head,Of Vecta's Isle, the seas beneath him spreadWith sharp Angelick Ken, views far and wide,And soon Prince Arthur's hateful Fleet descried. The heavens serenely smiled, and every sailFilled its wide Bosom, with th' indulgent Gale. Mercy, Deliverance, Pity, Hope displaidTheir silver Wings, and glad Attendance paid,sung on the shrowds, or with the streamers plaid. Rage flashed, like Lightning, from th' Apostate's Eyes,And Envy swelled him to the vastest sizeThen thus he to himself. Was not to me in the famed Wars of heaven,The chief Command of all the Forces giv'n,sent by Confederate Potentates to wageUnheard of War, and all heaven's power engage?When I, to end with Honour the Campaign,Drew my bright Troops out, on th' Etherial Plain;And pushed on that great, last decisive Day,With God-like Vigour, for th' Imperial sway. In Lustre chief, in Danger and Command,Did I Proud Michael's Veteran Troops withstand. Michael, than whom a Braver Combatant,For skill and strength, the Foe could never vaunt. 'Gainst fresh Battalions still poured on I stood,smeered with Celestial Dust, and seraphs Blood. Had not our Mould been Aether, Pure and Fine,Laboured with Care, anneeled with skill Divine;The Blows of mighty Cherubs Death had cloied,Unpeopled heaven, and the Bright Race destroied. With Michael pained with ghastly Wounds, at lengthI closed, and grasped him with Immortal strength;And down heaven's Precipice, had headlong hurledThe great Arch-Angel, to th' Infernal World,Had not swift Uriel trembling at the sight,That filled all heaven, with Horrour and dire Fright,Rushed in, to save him from unequal Fight. Their stagg'ring Army shrunk, and we had wonThe Throne we fought for, but th' Almighty's sonBrought strong Recruits, to reinforce their Host,And win back what their General Michael lost. 'Tho' overmatcht, did I not firmly stand,The chiefest Mark of his Revenging Hand?Did I from Posts of greatest Danger run,Or once his bright Triumphal Chariot shun?Did I once shrink, when showers of poysoned DartsDipt in Eternal Wrath, shot thro' our Hearts?When massy Rocks of heavenly Chrystal flew,Which the strong Arms of mighty seraphs threw?Did I not run and timely Help afford,Where storms of Fire, and loudest Thunder roared?Tis true, o'er-born with Force, at last I fell,But got Immortal Fame, tho' with it Hell. scarce was I vanquished and o'erthrown but lateBy Power Almighty, and Eternal Fate. since that chief Lord, and Prince of Hell I've reigned,And from the Foe, his new-made World have gained. And long maintained the Conquests I had won;Now much lost back to his Almighty son. But faithful Octa has once more restoredThis happy Isle to me its ancient Lord. Have I been thus for great Atchievements famed,My Deeds throughout all heaven and Hell proclaimed;And shall this British, despicable Wight,Me and my Priests, force to a second Flight?Rifle my Temples, and in Triumph bear,Thro' shouting Throngs, the spoils high in the Air?Who then to me will Hymns of Praise return,Who on my Altars Odorous Incense burn?If I chastise not this vain Briton's Pride,That does insulting on the Ocean ride. If I secure not my new conquered seat,And all his wild, ambitious Arms defeat. This having said, to heaven he mounts upright,And to the Northern Pole directs his Flight. All fired with Rage, and full of anxious Care,With his swift Wings, he cuts the yielding Air. As when the sun pours from his Orb of Light,A glorious Deluge, on the Face of Night. His Golden Rays shot from the Rosy East,Reach in a Moment, the remotest West,And smiling on the Mountains Heads are seen,Th' immense Expansion past, that lies between. The Prince of Darkness now, once Prince of Light,With equal swiftness takes his Airy Flight,And the vast Interval of seas, and Isles,Wild Desarts, spacious Forrests, snowy Hills,Past in a Moment, does on Fioel Light;Of Lapland Alpes, chief for amazing Height. Where Thor resides, who heretofore by LotThe sovereign Rule o'er Winds, and Tempests got. Here in strong Prisons bound with heavy Chains,His howling, savage subjects he restrains,And in Eternal Din, and Uproar reigns. In close Apartments, round his desart Court,Fierce Pris'ners are confined of different sort. Here Boundless stores, and Treasures InfiniteOf Vapours, steams, and Exhalations, fitT' engender Winds, or snow, or Hail, or Rain,In subterranean Magazins remain. Here new fledged Winds, young yelping Monsters tryTheir Wings, and sporting round their Prisons fly. Here whistling East-winds prove their shriller Notes:Here the hoarse south-winds, strain their hollow Throats. Boreas the fiercest and most turbulent,Of the mad Race, raves in his Dungeon pent. At th' Adamantine Door vast Hills are thrown,And abrupt Rocks of Ice, piled sevenfold on. Capricious Whirlwinds, of more Force than sound,In everlasting Eddys turning round,Grow Giddy, Furious and Extravagant,And strive to break from their close Den's restraint. When Thor unlocks their Prisons, out they fly,A lawless Rout, and with their Hellish CryOut-howl the hideous Monsters of the seas,Or savage Roarings of the Wilderness. some range the Flats, and scour the Champain Land,Or roll in tott'ring heaps the Desart sand. some to the lofty Woods direct their Course,And with an uncontrouled, impetuous ForceO'erturn opposing structures in their hast,Tear up tall Pines, and lay the Forrest wast. some to the Ocean with like speed resort,And in loud Tempests on the Billows sport. Embroil the Coasts, and in wild OutragesTurn up to heaven, the Bottom of the seas. But husht at Thor's Command they all obey,And to their ancient Prisons haste away. To him, thus Lucifer, great Prince on theeFate has bestowed the Empire of the sea,All there concerned, invoke thy Deity. The Merchants pray to thee to fill their sails,Enrich thy Priests, and purchase Prosperous Gales. I too thy suppliant, ask thy Powerful Aid,A Haughty Prince, designing to invadeMy Faithful subject Octa, and beguileMe of my Hopes of fair Britannia's Isle;sails with a Numerous Fleet, with Men and Arms,And Octa trembles at his Proud Alarms. Let him in Furious Hurricanes be tost,Be sunk, or wreckt, or on the Ocean lost,Beat him at least, from his intended Coast. Make him thy Vengeance feel, thy Power regard,And be what e're thou askest, thy Reward. Great Prince, then Thor replied,Who rul'st the Realms of Hell with soveraign sway,Whom all th' Infernal Thrones, and powers obey,I own Obedience to thy high Command,Who putt'st this scepter first into my Hand. Thou led'st in heaven our bright Battalions on,And bravely did'st attempt th' Almighty's Throne;I saw thy mighty Deeds, and kept my PostClose by thee, till that Glorious Day was lost. Thy faded splendor, and illustrious scars,From Ghasty Wounds, received in those just Wars,I view with Reverence, 'tis true subduedHeadlong we fell from heaven's high Tow'r's, pursuedWith Whirlwinds, and loud Thunder, down to Hell,And storms of Fire beat on us as we fell. Yet after that, thou led'st us to invadeThis Globous World, which we our Conquest made. And my Election Patronized by thee,This great Command and Province fell to me. That said, by him their heavy Gates unbared,That loud on mighty Iron Hinges jarred,Out ratling Eurus, and loud Boreas fly,And with Outrageous Tempests fill the sky. They bend their Course strait to the British Coast,And on those seas lay out their Anger most. Their Furious Wings the swelling surges beat,And rouse Old Ocean from his Peaceful seat. The raging seas in high ridged Mountains rise,And cast their angry Foam against the skies. Then gape so deep, that Day Light Hell invades,And shoots grey Dawning thro' th' affrighted shades. Low bellying Clouds soon intercept the Light,And o'er the Britons spread a Noon Day Night. Exploded Thunder tears th' Emboweled sky,And sulphurous Flames a dismal Day supply. The Dire Convulsions, for a certain spaceDistorted Nature, wresting from its PlaceThis Globe, set to the sun's more oblique View,And wrenched the Poles some Leagues yet more askew. Horrour, Confusion, Uproar, strife and FearIn all their wild amazing shapes appear. Mean time old Chaos joyful at the sight,Looked and smiled horrible on older Night,
        Hoping that Nature, their grand Foe would crackWith universal Ruin, and her WreckWould give them all their lost Dominions back. The sailor's Clamour, and enormous Cries,The Crack of Masts, mixed with the outrageous NoiseOf storms and Thunder, rending all the Air,Form the last scene of Horror and Despair. When the Just Arthur filled with Grief and Dread,And Pale Confusion, deeply sighed, and said,O righteous Heaven, why hast thou ranged this DayAgainst me all thy Terrors in Array!Armed in thy Cause, thy Temples to restore,And give that Aid thy sacred Priests implore. If thou such fierce Destruction dost dispence,To punish some unpardoned old Offence,On me let all thy Fiery Darts be spent,Let not my Crime involve the innocent. Whelm o'er my guilty Head these raging seas,And let this sacrifice thy Wrath appease,But let the British Youth return in Peace. That said, his ship unmasted, without Guide,Driv'n by the Winds and seas impetuous Tyde,The sight of all the scattered Navy lost,strikes on the Quicksand of an unknown Coast. Mean time bright Uriel, heaven's high Favourite,Left the Celestial Palaces of Light,sent by supream Command, and down he flies,Let by a Golden sun-beam thro' the skies. Meekness divine, serene and heavenly Grace,And fresh immortal Youth shone on his Face. Godlike his Form, his Looks so charming mildThat where he came all ravished Nature smiled. He strait alights on lofty Gobeum's Head,That wondered at the heaven about it shed,From the bright Cherubim, who touched his Lyre,Famed for his sweetness in the heavenly Quire:Th' enchanted Winds straightway their Fury laid,Grew wondrous still, and strict Attention paid. Aerial Demons that by Twilight stray,sport in loud Thunder, and in Tempest play,spread their brown Wings, and fly in Clouds away. The Day returns, the heavens no longer scowl,And fierce sea-Monsters charmed forget to howl. The Winds retreat, and leave the peaceful Waves,To rest their Wings, and sleep in Lapland Caves. soft Zephirs only stay to fan the Woods,And play in gentle Gales along the Floods. The Ocean smiles to see the Tempest fled,New lays his Waves, and smooths his ruffled Bed. All things thus husht, great Arthur gave CommandTo quit their ship, stuck in the barren sand,And in their Boats to make the Neighb'ring Land. They spy a Creek not far a Peaceful seatWhere flying Waves by furious Tempest beat,Find from the fierce Pursuit a safe Retreat. Free from th' outrageous Clamours of the Deep,They rest secure, and unmolested sleep. stretcht smooth beneath the shady Trees and Rocks,That guard them from the VVinds impetuous shocks. Here smaller Vessels may securely rideAnd all th' Assaults of angry sorms deride. Here they arrived, and heaven they first adored,That gave the Aid, their earnest Cries implored. That saved them from the Winds, VVaves, Rocks and storms,Deaths of so many, and such hideous Forms. Then for their parted Friends, with humble Prayer,They ask heaven's Pity, and indulgent Care. Now Arthur from the Rock, views far and wideThe seas beneath, if thence might be descriedThe Friends he lately lost, but views in vain,No Friend appears on all the Desart Main. Returned he thus began:Too dark th' Eternal's ways are, too profound,For the most sharp created Wit to sound. Clouds black, as those that rise the sacred FenceOf his high Throne, surround his Providence. Whose walks are trackless, and on every handAbout her paths, shades and thick Darkness stand. Her ways are so perplext, so wide her steps,such turns and windings, and such frightful leaps;such Gulphs, and interposing Rocks appear,There such Ascents, such dreadful Downfalls here,That Reason strait affrighted stops her pace,Is soon thrown off, and quits th' unequal Chase. Th' Almighty's Councils are so high and steep,Immense, unbounded, without bottom deep;Angels amazed from their high Thrones of Bliss,Trembling look down on this profound Abyss. sometimes he seems to thwart his own intent,stop and defeat his long designed event;Yet which way e're he steers, his end's attained,By uncouth means, with greater wonder gained. sometimes his high permission, leaves opprestThe Men most like him, and that serve him best:But still their sufferings and severer FatePrepare them for some glorious future state. Invited by sad Britain's Prayers, and Tears,To save her state; and ease her deadly Fears,VVe armed, deposed Religion to enthrone,T' enlarge the Christian Empire, not our own. VVe armed thus, to restore in Hell's despight,To heaven its VVorship, and to Men their Right. Resume your Courage then, it can't be true,That heavens Revenge should heaven's own Cause pursue. These Evils are not in displeasure meant,heaven is too Just, and you too Innocent. success and Triumph will our Arms attend,And these rough ways lead to a glorious End. VVith Pleasure we hereafter shall relateThese suff'rings, that will greater Joys create. He said, and all his anxious Cares supprest,And kept concealed his trouble in his Breast. VVith looks composed, 'twixt pleasure and despair,Grave but serene, he bids them all repairTheir strength, exhausted with much toil and care. Of Meats and Fruits part of their Naval store,That with them from their ship they brought ashore:Their weary Limbs reposed, beneath the shadeOf well spread Trees, a grateful Meal they made. Rich VVine of Burgundy, and choice Champaigne,Relieve the toil they suffered on the Main. But what more cheared them than their Meats and VVine,VVas wise Instruction, and Discourse Divine,From God-like Arthur's Mouth, by heaven inspired;That all their Breasts with sacred Passions fired. Great were his Thoughts, strong and sublime his senseOf heaven's Decrees, Foreknowledge, Providence. He reasoned deep of heaven's mysterious Ends,And made stern Justice, and fair Mercy Friends. How high he soared, how Noble was his flight,speaking of Truth divine, and VVisdom infinite!He opens all the Magazins above,Of boundless Goodness and Eternal Love. From these rich stores of heaven, these sacred springsOf everlasting Joy and Peace, he bringsAmbrosial Food, and rich Nectarean VVine,That chear pure souls, and nourish Life Divine. He then compared this transient mortal state,To the fierce Tempest they escaped so late,That here is every great and good Mans Fate. If God-like Men for heaven embark, and standTheir Course direct, to make the blissful Land;strait Hell the bloody signal gives to Arm,Cain's cruel offspring takes the dire alarm;And potent Fiends by sea their Forces joyn,T' obstruct their way, and break their brave design. All with consummate Malice, furious Rage,Against th' adventurous Voyagers engage. Through all the sky they raise outrageous storms,And Death stands threat'ning in a thousand Forms. Clouds charged with loud Destruction drown the day,And airy Daemons in wild VVhirlwinds play. Thick Thunderclaps, and Lightning's livid glareDisturb the sky, and trouble all the Air. Outrage, Distraction, Clamour, Tumult Reign,Through the Dominions of the unquiet Main. The labouring Bark with heavenly Treasure fraught,Now almost sunk, now up in Tempests caught. Near sands and Rocks, rides on the dark Abyss,Long beaten off from the bright Coasts of Bliss. At last calm Day succeeds this stormy Night,And the glad Voyagers find in their sight,The Realms of Peace, and the blest shores of Light. Here they arrive, and find a safe Retreat,And all their pain and labours past forget. There was a Cave hard by, that Nature madeIn the hard Rock, and covered with the shade,Of spreading Trees, that Day could not invade. Hither the Pious British Prince retires,To offer Praises up and pure desires. Here rapt'rous Converse he with heaven maintains,And aided by Devotion's purest strains,Combates Almighty Power, and Conquest gains. Devotion, that oft binds th' Almighty's Arms,And with her Prayers and Tears, her powerful charms,Of all its Thunder, his right hand disarms. she passes quick heaven's lofty Crystal Walls,And the high Gates fly open when she calls. The charming Goddess of Divine Address,Has to th' Almighty's Presence free Access. Her Power can sentenced Criminals Reprieve,Judgment Arrest, and bid the Rebel live. Her Charms did once the sun's swift Chariot stay,And on the Verge of heaven, held back the falling Day. she makes contentious Winds forget their strife,And calls back to the Dead, departed Life. Charmed by her Voice, Rivers have stoped their Course,And the chilled Fire laid down its burning Force. such is Devotion's Power, which Arthur knew,And when distressed still to this Refuge flew. Much to his Conduct he, much to his Arms,But more he trusted to Devotion's Charms. Of Triumph and success he rarely failed,For those on Earth, and these in heaven prevailed. Now in the silent, shady Cave retired,He with her sacred Fury lay inspired. The Prince being thus entranced, a heavenly Lightshoots smiling through the Wood with silent flight:The Trees admire the Glory on them shed,And seemed to start, and humbly bow their Head;When fresh arrived on Earth, with heaven's Commands,Great Raphael's glorious Form by Arthur stands. Celestial sweetness, Mild and God-like GraceIneffable, sat on his blooming Face. His Cheeks such Beauty shewed, such Light and Joy his Eyes,As from full Bliss, fresh Youth, and strength immortal rise. The purest piece of heaven's Etherial Blue,In a rich Mantle, from his shoulders flew. Celestial Linnen, finely spun and WoveOn Looms Divine, by all the skill above,Bleached on th' Empyreal Plains till White as snow,Made the long Robe that to his Feet did flow. Immortal Gold, Illustrious as the Morn,And dazling Gemms by high Arch Angels worn,With pond'rous Pearl, from heaven's bright Eastern shore,Adorn the shining Garments that he wore. A Purple Girdle, from the Morning skyNew rent, does round his starry Vesture tye. Thus he appeared, and with the Light he gave,And unknown Fragrancy, filled all the Cave. Then thus he spake, Hail mine and heaven's kind Care,Hither I come, drawn by thy powerful Prayer. Know Righteous Prince, th' Almighty does approve,Your firm Adhesion, and unshaken Love. Ends Great and Wise lodged in his secret Breast,Obstruct your Wishes, and your Course molest. Yet still pursue your great and just Intent,No Force or Arts shall your Design prevent,Propitious heaven Decrees your wished Event. You on these Coasts for happy Ends are thrown,And after this, expect the British Crown. Your Friends and Navy on the Ocean lost,Are all arrived safe on th' Armorie Coast:By the impetuous Tempest beaten back,But Men and ships saved from the threatened Wreck. You're cast on Hoel's Lands, amidst your Foes,That hate your Cause, and your just Arms Oppose. But fear not Hoel's Power, though now your Foe,By Hell incensed, he will not long be so. Go then directly to his Court, for there,A Glorious Work demands your Pious Care. That said, with outstretcht Wings he soars upright,And through the Winds vast Empire takes his flight▪
        He cuts the Clouds, and by the Planets fliesUp the steep Crystal Mountains of the skies. And swiftly passing through the starry sphears,Before the Throne he in his place appears,The Cherub's gone, and with him Arthur's fears. Who to his Lords returns, and to their HeartCourage and Joy, his Words and Looks impart. His God-like Language does their Fears abate,And with fresh hopes their troubled Breasts dilate. Mean time th' Infernal Thrones and Powers resort,At their great Monarch's summons to his Court. Where they in Council meet, and there debateImportant matters, high Designs of state. Their Prince with Pride extended, mounts his Throne,Of polished Gold, whence horrid splendor shone:And mingled with the shades tremendous Light,More dreadful thus, as Fires, that Flame by Night. In sad Magnificence, and dismal state,He sits, and round th' Infernal Orders sate:Then Lucifer began:Immortal Potentates, Illustrious Lords,The British Youth's ambitious aim affords,A weighty subject for your high debate;Who seeks the ruin of your power and state. You all have heard, how with a mighty ForceEmbarked, he strait for Albion steered his Course,King Octa to attack, our Votary,And make our Priests from our new Altars fly. I watched, and aided by the Power of Thor,
        I shewed the Miscreant another shore. His Fleet beat back, and haughty purpose croft,He wanders, shipwreckt on th' Armoric Coast. Where faithful Hoel does the scepter hold,Mighty in Arms, and in our service bold. spirits Divine, high Peers of Hell, suggest,By what sure Plagues he may be more distrest,His Ruin finished, and his sect opprest. That said, a Fury crawls from out her Cell,The bloodiest Minister of Death and Hell. A monstrous shape, a foul and hideous sight,That did all Hell with her dire looks affright. Huge, full gorged snakes on her lean shoulders hung,And Death's dark Courts with their loud hissing rung. Her Teeth and Claws were Iron, and her Breath,Like subterranean Damps, gave present Death. Flames worse then Hells, shot from her bloody Eyes,And Fire and sword Eternally she Cries. No certain shape, no Feature regular,No Limbs distinct in th' odious Fiend appear. Her squallid, bloated Belly did arise,swoln with black Gore, to a prodigious size. Distended vastly, by a mighty FloodOf slaughtered saints, and constant Martyrs Blood. Part stood out prominent, but part fell down,And in a swagging heap, lay wallowing on the ground. A Monster so deformed, so fierce as this,It self a Hell, ne're saw the dark Abyss. Horrour till now the ugliest shape esteemed,so much out-done, a harmless Figure seemed. Envy and Hate, and Malice blushed to seeThemselves Eclipsed by such Deformity. Her Feaverish Thirst drinks down a sea of Blood,Not of the Impious, but the Just and Good. 'Gainst whom she burns with unextinguished Rage,Nor can th' exhausted World her Wrath asswage. Then thus the Fury Persecution spake:I mighty Prince of Hell, will undertakeThis glorious Work, I quickly will inspireHoel, with my ungovernable Fire. Without remorse he shall my Will Obey,And crush this Briton, now his easie Prey. Nero by me raised his Illustrious Name,And Dioclesian got Immortal Fame. I their rude, inbred Cruelty refined,And stampt my perfect Image on their Mind. My flames all Love's course mixture did destroy,And purged off soft Compassion's base alloy;I formed and disciplined their untaught Hate,And raised their fierceness to a perfect state. Where shame, and all reflecting sense is lost,And Hell can't purer strains of Malice boast. Inexorable they all Cries withstood,Ravished with slaughter, and regaled with Blood. Hard marble Rocks might with more ease relent,And Fire and Plague, learn sooner to repent. Then Christian Kings my Fury entertained,And taught by me, in Blood and slaughter reigned. With pious Rage and fierce destructive Zeal,I first inspired their Minds, and did revealThe mystery, how deep Revenge to take,And slay the servants for the Master's sake. How bloody Wrath might with Devotion joyn,And sacred Zeal with Cruelty combine. By me the unknown way they understood,T' attone the Christians God, with Christian Blood. By me they shook off Fear's and Love's Restraints;And on God's Altars burnt his slaughtered saints. I made them call, that all remorse might cease,Murder Compassion, Desolation Peace. Whilst my Infernal Heats their Breasts inspired,To the vile sect their own mad Zeal acquired,Wider Destruction, and more fatal Harms,Then all your scythian, or your Gothick Arms. And Rome, proud Rome her self, must owe to meHer present state, and future Dignity. The greatest Genius this, I e're could find,And to receive my Image best inclined. I will her Mind inspire, and to her HeartImmortal hate, to Abel's Race impart. These Breasts she empties with her Infant Jaws,I File her Teeth, and shape her tender Claws. I Nurse her on the horrid Alps high Tops,And feed her hunger with Cerberean sopsDipt in Tartarean Gall, and Hemlock Juice,That in her Veins will noble Blood produce. Fierce Tygers, Dragons, Wolves about her stay,They grin, and snap, and bite, and snarling play. I to her Jaws, throw Infants newly Born;she sucks their Blood, and by her Teeth are tornTheir tender Limbs, while I rejoyce to seesuch noble proofs of growing Cruelty. To her wide Breast, and vast capacious soul,I often Torrents of black Poyson rowl:she drinks the livid Flood, and through her VeinsMad Fury runs, and wild Distraction reigns. I'll lead her from the Rocks, her strength full grown,Fix her high seat in the Imperial Town,And give her scarlet, and a threefold Crown. No Blood will then her mighty Thirst asswage,No Ravage cloy her Antichristian Rage. Her Mitred sons that never can relent,From the great Cain, shall prove their high Descent. Their Deeds of strange Infernal Cruelty,shall shew their Race worthy of Him and me. Lay-Bigots, I with time and labour wrought,some inward Grudgings still against me fought:'Twas hard to raise their hate to a degree,From struggling Nature, and all Pity free. But these Church-Zealots, of a truer breed,Are formed with Ease, and scarce my Labour need. Their forward Genius without teaching grows,And all my hopes, and ev'n my wish out-does. How often shall thy glorious sons, O Rome,
        With Martyrs Flames inlighten Christendom?How often shall they, to deride their God,Lift up in Prayer, their Hands all full of Blood?The wasted World shall feel their loud Alarms,Their blest Massacres, and their hallowed Arms. As if their high intent were to Efface,All Footsteps left of Abel's hateful Race. Bloody Tribunals, Rapine, Fire and sword,And Desolation, dayly sport afford. Mankind they shall with such dire Plagues attack,As will their Church a holy Desart make. such is my Zeal to serve th' infernal state,And shall this British Prince escape my Hate?Forbid it Hell, and here she made a pause;The Lords in Council gave a loud applause. The Prince of Darkness leaping from his place,Did in his Arms, his darling Fiend Embrace. Her Anger then rose higher, and all HellUneasie seemed, she grew so terrible. 〈1 page duplicate〉〈1 page duplicate〉she strait contracts her vast dilated size,And through Hell's dusky Void, she upward flies. As when rich Towns great Cost and Art employIn Fire-works, to express their publick Joy,For some great Vict'ry won by Land, or sea,Or on some Prince's Coronation Day. The flaming Rockets hizzing fly by Night,And fill the sky with unknown Noise and Light. The sphears amazed stand, or move slowly on,And wonder how the Day returns so soon,And what new stars rise brighter than their own. so does the Fiend, her snakes all hissing rise,Through the thick haggaired Air, and as she fliesLeaves tracks of Light, cast from her fiery Eyes. And now arrived on the grey Coasts of Day,Direct to Hoel's Court she takes her way. Where she alighted, when the sun had hurledHis glorious Orb hence, to the other World. 'Twas then when all things looked, as if old NightHad Nature crushed, and seized her ancient Right,Whilst silence, shades, and Lights around create,sad, solemn Pomp, t'express her Death-like state. Winds, and wild Beasts lye in their Dens at rest,Nor these the Woods, nor those the seas molest. The sleeping Vultures drop their prey, the DoveCeases her Cooing, and forgets to love. The Jocond Fairies Dance their silent round,And with dark Circles mark the trampled ground. Tartarean Forms skim o're the Mountains Heads,Or lightly sweep along the dewy Meads. Ghosts leave their Tombs hid Murders to reveal,Or Treasures which themselves did once conceal. Visions through th' Air, and careless Phantoms stray,Or round Mens troubled Heads while sleeping play. The Fury Alman's Reverend shape assumes,Odin's High Priest, and so to Hoel comes. For the Priest's Form, is fittest to engagePrinces in Blood, and move destructive Rage. Thus changed the Fiend, such is her Craft, appears,And thus began, just Hoel, all those yearsI lived, I did with studious Care employ,How best I might the Christian Crew destroy. I thy great soul in this blest Cause engaged,Inspired with Heats Divine, not yet asswaged. I quit Elysian Pleasures to impart,What does with greater Joy extend my Heart;And will do thine, Arthur, Curst be that Name,Designing Empire, and Illustrious FameEmbarked with Arms, fair Albion to invade,But by just heaven, is thy cheap Captive made. Pursued with Thunder, and in Tempests tost,At last he's shipwreckt on this happy Coast. With his sad Friends he wanders up and down,Naked, perplext, deserted, and undone. But yet just heaven Decrees him greater Harm,But saves that Glory for your Zealous Arm. To take his Life must be your Pious Care,And with the Gods divided Honour share. Thus you their En'my, and your own remove,secure your Peace, and please the powers above. To Christians this can be no Injury,That call for Torments, and are pleased to Dye. They all seem fond to wear the Martyr's Crown,And meet the Flames, with greater of their own. No Rights, no Rules of Justice you invade,For Ruin's their Profession, Death their Trade. Go then, and grace the Briton, that comes onTo meet you, and receive the Martyr's Crown. Remove this Pillar of their Church, and allThe unsupported Roof, will crack and fall. Take this Defender of their Faith away,The passive Rabble, tamely will Obey. Their Lives in sport you may at leisure take,They quickly fall, that no Resistance make. The Gods into your Hands have cast your Foe,To take his Life will please heaven, him, and you. That said, she breathed her soul into his Breast,And her wild Fury all his Veins possest. Infernal Flames Rage in his poisoned Blood,And his swoln Heart Boils with th' impetuous Flood,The Fiend her shape of thickened Air dissolves,And disappears, Hoel surprized revolvesThe welcome message in his Mind, and straitCommands his Lords and Guards should on him wait,On the first shooting of the tender Day,so eager did he seem to seise the Prey. Now was the Eastern sky-died Purple spread,For fair Aurora's Radiant Feet to tread. she mounts serene, and with mild dawning Light,smiles on the lowring, dusky Face of Night;That to Victorious Day yields up her seat,Whilst her black Forces silently Retreat. As when a Lyon at the dawn of Day,Roused with fierce Hunger up to Hunt his Prey,stretches his Limbs out, Yawns, and tries his Paws,And for sure Death prepares his cruel Jaws. He stands, and rolls about his Angry Eyes,Lashing his sides to make his Fury rise. Then scowrs the Hills, Ranges the Forrests o're,And Thunders thro the Desart with his hideous Roar. The Winds all husht sit trembling on the Trees,And scarcely Whisper out a gentle Breeze. Wolves dare not Howl, but grinning softly creep,And Leopards stretcht out, feign themselves asleep. Th' affrighted Herds close in their Covert lye,And to escape his Rage, with Terrour dye. Thus Hoel, with infernal Rage possest,With fierce desire speeds to the bloody Feast. A deadly storm does on his Forehead lowr,Himself his Rage, Arthur his Hopes devour. Breathing out Death he marched, but at mid-day,He stands by heaven arrested in his way. The Air serene a black thick Cloud appeared,And as it hovered o're their Heads, were heardCelestial Flutes, and Harps divinely strung,With Hymns and Hallelujahs set and sungBy the best Masters of the Quire above,With Bliss transported, and inspired with Love. Whilst Hoel and his Friends pleased, and amazed,Listened, and on the scene descending gazed;The broken Cloud, pours out pure Floods of Light,show'rs of Celestial Rays transcendent bright,And storms of splendor, dazling Mortal sight. Th' illustrious Tempest does on Hoel beat,Who falls astonished, headlong from his seat. Confounded with unsufferable Day,Groveling in Glory on the shining Way,And with bright Ruin overwhelmed, he lay. 'Twas then, a soft, still heavenly Voice, that brokeFrom out the Cloud, to trembling Hoel spoke. 'Gainst me, what Fury did thy Arms Engage?What moved thee with inexorable RageVain Man; to persecute my saints and Me?In vain thou seek'st to baffle heaven's Decree. Vain is thy Force, and impotent thy Hate,Too weak thy Arms, to stem the Tyde of Fate. The Torrent bears thy saint Resistance down,Retire, or in Eternal Ruin Drown. Then Hoel thus, O tell me, who thou art,Great spirit, and thy Will to me impart. Tell me if Errour has my Feet misled,What safer Paths I may hereafter tread. The Voice replied:I am the Christians God, whom you pursue. Go meet my servant Arthur, he shall shewAt large, what thou hast to believe, what do. The scene here disappeared, his Lords come round,And raised reviving Hoel from the Ground. Who marches on, the British Prince to find,And Act not what himself, but heaven designed. With anxious Thoughts the Vision he revolves,And to Obey heaven's high Command resolves. Whilst to his Lords the Vision he relates,They find themselves advanced to Conda's Gates. Arthur mean time, to whom great Raphael's word,Unshaken Hopes, and Courage did afford;Proceeded on his Way, but sent beforeEmbassadors to Hoel, to exploreHis temper, and the Genius of his Court,That he just steps might take by their Report. He chose out to discharge this weighty Trust,Valiant Pollador, Roderick the Just;And Faithful Galbut, Friends that in distress,(A thing unknown to Courts) their Love express. soon after Hoel had his Entrance made,At the same City they arrived, and staidBut little, for th' admission which they praied. Then Hoel first the Britons thus addrest,Let no sad Thought your pious Prince molest. A Message sent from heaven preventing yours,To me great Joy, safety to him procures. Friendship and Love, fill my enlightened Mind,From Hatred purged, from Treachery refined. Return, and let your Valiant Leader know,His God has to a Friend, transformed his Foe. Tell him he's safe from all intended Harms,And that I hast, t' Embrace him in my Arms. With Regal Bounty, he to all presentsRich swords, and various splendid Ornaments. To Arthur sends a Chariot, dazling bright,That to the sun returned redoubled Light. And Horses of th' Iberian Noble Race,That right Descent from the swift Eurus trace. Bold, Gen'rous, sprightly, as th' Illustrious Breed,That in th' Etherial, blue Enclosures Feed. That thro heaven's Wast, with the sun's Chariot play,And govern Time, by carrying round the Day. Their Furniture of Gold, their Bridles Gold,And golden Bits, their champing Mouths did hold. They hast and all their Diligence employ,To fill Just Arthur's Mind, with Peace and Joy. To him returning they impart at large,The kind, endearing Things they had in Charge. As when his sons to Iacob did relate,That Ioseph lived, and lived in Regal state;Telling of all his Riches, Power, Renown,Egypt's support, and Prop to Pharoah's Crown. Resistless Floods of sudden Pleasure RollAlong his Veins, and break in on his soul. He sinks beneath the pressure of his Joy,And Ioseph's Life, does almost his destroy. Then Doubts and Fears, his Joys, high Tyde oppose,From which Contention fiercer Tempests rose. While his cross Passions fight with equal Power,Each Triumphs in his turn, as Conquerour. The Patriarch in this Distraction lost,Is in each storm with equal Danger tost. But when the Chariots and rich Train he saw,He did from thence fresh Life and Vigour draw. His Breast from all contending Passions freed,Calm Joy, and unmolested Peace succeed. Enough the Patriarch was heard to Cry,I'll hast to Ioseph's Arms, and in them Dye. so when Just Arthur heard the Message first,His wavering Mind with Fears and wise Distrust,And rising Tydes of suddain Joy was tost,Uncertain which strong Passion pressed him most. But when he saw the Presents Hoel sent,His Doubts suppressed, he grew more Confident. And his calm Mind eased of his anxious Cares,T' embrace his new, and generous Friend prepares. And now advancing Night the sky invades,While close pursued by the Victorious shades. The Rayes that faintly from the Ground recoil,On the green Fields, let fall their pearly spoil. When Arthur to his secret Joys retires,Where his exhaling soul to heaven aspires,In sacred Anhelations, and inflamed Desires. Fixt Contemplation feeds his Hope and Love,With rapt'rous Preludes to the Joys above. His ravished Eyes view the unmeasured Bliss,In the next Life enjoied, believed in this. so David often passed the silent Night,And in his Transports felt sublime Delight,surpassing all that mighty Monarchs have,That his own Crown, and all his Triumphs gave. While baser Birds the humble Vally love,And sing contented with their little Grove;The Eagle's generous Pride does nobly riseTo heaven, and thence does this low World despise. scorning a Vulgar Bough, he thinks he seesWoods in the Clouds, and hanging Groves of Trees. Thither he hasts, and leaves th' ignoble Brood,That aim no higher, to their shrubs and Wood. If to his Prey he stoops, ashamed he fliesBack to his airy Dwelling in the skies. Where in the Clouds he hides his Royal Head,safe from the snares, that watchful Fowlers spread▪
        so Men of courser Mould, and baser Birth,Pleased with the Dust lye grov'ling on the Earth. For Food their souls all foul and bloated, seekThe Damps and steams, that from its Bowels reek. While Men divinely Born, still upwards move,And scorn this World, that courts in vain their Love. In Flames of Zeal, and Pangs of pure Desire,These to the seats of Light and Peace aspire. Where they converse with the blest Minds above,And wonder what on Earth invites Mens Love. This Molehill Earth has lost its former Charms,Molehill for Bulk, and stings wherewith it swarms. With Wonder they observe how Mortals Pride,Can into Kingdoms this small Heap divide. How one t' enlarge the Empire he has got,Invades the Borders of his Neighbour's spot. How this proud Monarch of a Turf, is vextWith restless cares, to dispossess the next. As heaven's vast Globes that fill the World with Light,seem little Balls to distant Mortals sight,That in the most capacious Planets, weNo room for states, and large Dominions see. so these more noble Minds advanced so high,Believe the same of us, that from the sky,The low-hung Earth's contracted Body spy. They keep above free from the fatal Nets,That for unwary Feet the Tempter sets. Free from the Earth's dark smoke, and endless Noise,They dwell in Peace, and feed on heavenly Joys. such Pleasures Arthur while retired, enjoied,And wished he ever might be thus emploied. And now th' radiant Gates of th' Eastern sky,Unbared by bright Aurora, open fly. strait issues out the sun with mighty Force,As Gyants do, prepared to run his Course. The joyful Britons all things ready make,And their new Friend to meet, their Journy take. scarce had the sun his glitt'ring Chariot driv'n,Up the steep Brow, and sharp Ascent of heaven. When the glad Princes did each other meet,And Hoel thus did first the stranger greet. As a faint Traveller in Arabian sands,scorcht with the burning sun-beams, panting stands,Views the dry Desart with despairing Eyes,And for the springs, and distant Rivers sighs. As sailers long for Land, heaven's Aid implore,And with their greedy wishes grasp the shore;When beaten from the hospitable Coast,And in loud storms upon the Ocean tost;Where Ruin in so many shapes appears,They scarcely can attend to all their Fears. I've wished to see you with the like desire,The Oracle of whom I must enquire,The way to Peace, and Everlasting Bliss,Which lost in Night, and unknown Paths, I miss. When first I set out with an hostile Mind,And Evils which I dread to name, designed;The Powers that guard your sacred Life alarmed,soon interposed, and my wild Hand disarmed. Kind heaven that both our safeties did design,Turned from your Head the Blow, the Guilt from mine. For on the way a Glory dreadful BrightAround me shone, and with excessive Light. As they do stars, the weaker sun-beams drowned:I as transfixt, fell headlong to the Ground. 'Twas then a wondrous heavenly Voice I heard,The words were these, but no blest Face appeared. 'Gainst me what Fury does thy Arms engage?What moves thee with inexorable RageVain Man, to persecute my saints and me?In vain thou striv'st to baffle heaven's Decree. Vain is thy Force, and Impotent thy Hate,Too weak thy Arms to stem the Tide of Fate. The Torrent bears thy faint Resistance down,Retire, or in Eternal Ruin drown. I strait cried out, O tell me who thou artGreat spirit, and thy Will to me impart. Tell me if Error has my Feet misled,What safer Paths I may hereafter tread. The Voice replied:I am the Christians God, whom you pursue,Go find my servant Arthur, he shall shewAt large, what thou hast to believe, what do. Prince Arthur paused a while, then silence broke,And friendly thus th' Armoric King bespoke. Th' Eternal's Providence I must adore,That has compelled me to th' Armoric shore. That I might here, serve such a glorious End,And to the Christian Cause gain such a Friend. Goodness Divine, King Hoel does inviteBy Miracles, t' enjoy Celestial Light. Cast on your Coasts, with Pleasure I will stay,To aid and guide you in your heavenly way. To whom th' Armoric Monarch thus Replied;VVhile we to Nannetum together ride,Instruct, O Pious Prince, my willing Mind:It is a task your God has you designed. Unfold his heavenly Will, and let me know,What Worship to him, what Belief, I owe. To whom the Prince, this favour must I ask,Before I undertake the pious Task:That you'll dispatch your servants to the Coast,To seek my Friends out, in the Tempest lost. And if by chance cast on th' Armoric shore,They wander up and down, distressed and poor,Your angry subjects, may not them annoy,Nor with devouring Flames, their ships destroy. This Friendship shewn, I'll with a cheerful Mind,Attempt the Task by you, and heaven enjoyned. When the past Night did with her dusky TrainAdvance, o'er shadowing all th' Aierial Plain;A sudden Transport did my soul engage,And all my Limbs shook with the sacred Rage. straight caught up from the Body, through the skiesTo the third heaven, my ravished soul did rise. Where Things ineffable I saw, and heardDivine Instruction, which my Mind preparedTo aid you in your heavenly Way, and shewWhat Worship, to th' Eternal Mind is due. straight Hoel to the shores his servants sent,Who might the Harms, that Arthur feared, prevent. Who might the hapless Britons kindly treat,And safe conduct them to his Royal seat. such Love the King to Arthur's Friends exprest,Who now prepared t' obey the King's Request. "
"6","Prince Arthur. BOOK II. ATtentive Hoel's Eyes on Arthur's FaceWere fixt, who thus began with God-like grace. Before th' unshaken Pillars of the EarthWere Reered, before prolifick Nature's Birth,Before the Register of Time begun,Or heaven's bright Forces thronged about the sun,Was a wild Void, that no set Bounds restrained,Where silence, Night, and Desolation reigned. Where yet no glimmering track of Light appeared,No Discord yet, or Harmony was heard. From Ages past lay in th' Eternal's Mind,A finished Model of a World, designedTo be Erected by Almighty Hands,VVhere now this Round, Capacious Fabrick stands. The deep Foundations laid, in heaven they saidA strange new World was making, Fame soon spreadThe tydings through the Palaces of Bliss,To see a work so wonderful as this,Millions of Angels to heaven's Turrets fly,And on the Crystal Terras of the sky,stood in bright Throngs, and on Creation gazed,And at the sight were ravished, and amazed. Almighty Vigour strove through all the Void,And such prolifick Influence emploied,That ancient, barren Night did pregnant grow,And quickened with the World in Embrio. The struggling seeds of unshaped Matter ly,Contending in her Womb for Victory. No Order, Form, or Parts distinct and clear,Did in the Crude Conception, yet appear. Thick Darkness did the unripe Light Embrace,That faintly glanced on Chaos shady Face. The unfledged Fire has no bright Wings to rise,But scarce distinguished, with the Water lies. It's sprightly, ruddy Youth not yet attained,The glitt'ring seeds, Mother of Fire, remainedLike golden sands, thick scattered on the shore,Of the wild Deep, and shone in burning Oar. In glowing Heaps the stars lay dusky bright,Rude and unpolished Balls of unwrought Light. The sphears piled up about their Poles were Furled,Designed the swadling Bands of th' Infant World. The sky dispersed, lay in Etherial Oar,And azure Veins, betraied th' Empyreal store. The watry Treasures in th' unfashioned Birth,Lay in the rough Embraces of the Earth. But at the great Command will Thaw, and throwThe Dross off, and like melted Metals flow. Besides vast numbers of loose Atoms stray,And in the restless Deep of Chaos play. In dark Encounters they for Empire strive,And gain what Chance, and wild Confusion give. Which joyntly here possess the sov'raign sway,Pleased with those subjects most, that least Obey. Order, a banished Rebel, flies the Place,And strife and Uproar fill the noisy space. Tumult and Misrule please at Chaos Court,And everlasting Wars his Throne support. Troops armed with Heat have here a Battel won,But Moist and Cold the Victor soon dethrone. Here heavier seeds rush on in numerous swarms,And crush their Lighter Foes, with pond'rous Arms. The Lighter strait Command with equal Pride,And on wild Whirlwinds in mad Triumph ride. None long submits to a superiour Power,Each yields, and in his turn is Conquerour. If some grown mild from fierce Contention cease,And with calm Neighbours court a separate Peace;If Truce they make, and in kind Leagues combine,Their short Embraces some rude shocks disjoyn. Th' Eternal's Voice composed these Atoms jars,And justling Elements intestine Wars. He sets imprisoned Heat and Vigour free,And suits and ranges Natures that agree. He through the Mass a mighty Ferment spread,And where it came mis-shaped Confusion fled. Dark Chaos now throws off his gloomy Face,Puts on fresh Beauty, and a heavenly Grace. Th' Almighty spake, and strait the sprightly LightWith lovely Looks broke from th' Abyss of Night;On Golden Wings it mounts, and in its wayIts smiles diffuse new Morn, and unripe Day. Aloft vast spreading sheets of Ether rise,Matter for sphears, and pure transparent skies. The sky that for its Compass scarce finds room,spun thin, and wove on Nature's finest Loom. The new-born World in its soft Bosom wraps,And all around its starry Mantle laps. The sun's vast Globe that till the Birth of Day,All Rough and Cloudy in wild Chaos lay;Well wrought and polished, is advanced on high;The vagrant Beams that straied about the sky,Now beckened by Creating Power obey,And the bright Forces hither hast away. Then hov'ring on the spungy Globe they wait,And round their new appointed Mansion fate. The thirsty Orb drinks in the liquid Beams,And now but one vast sea of Glory seems. It self a heaven with dazling Lustre bright,Pours out pure Floods of overflowing Light. Here as in Furnaces of boiling Gold,stars dipt come back, full as their Orbs can holdOf glitt'ring Light, here too the Moon all drowned,Does with the Golden Metal fill her Round. sometimes half dipt it but in part adornsHer Face, and shines with Blunt, Refulgent Horns. Th' Etherial Plain now cultivated bears,A shining Harvest of Illustrious stars. That at a distance seem small Lights, but nearCapacious Realms, and glorious VVorlds appear. The sphears spread forth their Bosoms, now refined,And Belly out, like sails swoln big with Wind. The Air beat out, and purified does lye,A Crystal deep between the Earth and sky. Through this thin Void the sun's indulgent Beams,Flow gently on the Earth in Golden streams. That kindly steal away the Watry store,And rob the Earth, but to enrich it more. The Earth with its own Burden tired, and prestDown with its weight, lies in the midst at rest. A Deep broke up, God calls the Waters, theyFeel the Command, and with quick flight Obey. In mighty Heaps the foaming Deluge flows,High liquid Walls and curling Ridges shows. some Waters with a smooth and gentle Tyde,On the Earth's plain and level surface glide. Others that meet a steep abrupt Descent;Roll down in Floods more loud and turbulent. At last they fall from the high Precipice,In noisy Floods into the dark Abyss. Till the vast Deluge with its liquid stone,Fills up the Deep, and Crowns the Ambient shore. Now their tall Heads the rising Mountains show,And wide mouthed Vallies sink themselves, as low. The Earth as yet all bare and naked lay,For heaven's Command th' imprisoned spirits stay. God spake, and straight a lovely spring appears,And every Field fresh, verdant Cloathing wears. Green Herbs adorn the Hills aspiring Heads,And smiling Flowers paint the Enamelled Meads. Trees starting up, lifted their Heads so high,They met the Clouds descending from the sky. some ranged in beauteous Order, stately stood,Others pressed close, and thronged into a Wood. some where the sun gives more indulgent Heat,Transparent Gums, and Od'rous Juices sweat. The fragrant Balsom-Tree distills around,Her healing Riches on the neighbouring Ground. The humble Jess' mine breaths Perfumes abroad,And wanton Zephyrs bear the balmy Load. Pure Crystal Rivers through the Meadows flow,Their flowry Banks smile on them, as they go. Their watry Train in snaky Windings slides,And in their streams the scaly Nation glides. Birds glad to try their Wings rise from the Earth,And with their songs they Celebrate their Birth. Beasts in their various Kinds all Mild, and Tame,stood gazing round, and wondered whence they came. The Bleating Flocks wander on every Hill,And lowing Herds the Ecchoing Vallies fill. The sporting Lyon Paws the wanton Bear,Wolves seek the Woods, the Lawns the timorous Deer. The Crested snake rolls on the flowry Plain,The shining Volumes of his spiral Train. Leviathan in th' Ocean takes his place,Prince of the Waters, and the Finny Race. Rolling amidst the Waves, he takes his sport,As a great sea-God in his watry Court. swimming to Land he drives high seas before,Like a great Island floating near the shore. In wanton pastime he sucks in with Ease,Then spouts against the skies th' exhausted seas:Like some prodigious Water-Engine madeTo play on heaven, if Fires should heaven invade. so fair, so rich a Paradise as this,Almighty Power called from the dark Abyss:To keep the Birth-day of the World, the springDoes all her Joys and fragrant Riches bring. Nature appearing in her brightest Dress,Does all her sweets and heavenly Charms express. The sphears in tuneful Measures Roll above,And heaven's bright Orbs in beauteous Order move. The smiling Earth discovers perfect Joy,Where nothing noxious can its Peace annoy. The Air's so soft, such balmy Odours fly,so sweet the Fruits, so pure and mild the sky,The Blissful states, too great to be exprest,By all the Pleasures of the wanton East,By th' Arab's sweets from Zephirs tender VVingsGently shook off, or what the Merchant bringsOf Forreign Luxury with tedious Toil,From Asia's Coast, or soft Campania's soil. Thus after five days Labour Nature stood,God viewed his Creatures, and pronounced them Good. But still there wanted one that might adoreDivine Perfections, and heaven's Gifts implore. That might himself, and his great Author know,Obey his God, and rule as God below. Then Man was made, the Author framed and wroughtThe purer Mould with more Concern and Thought. His Mind made up of pure Etherial Air,Came from the Hands Divine all Bright and Fair. And lodged in Clay did at its Entrance giveso quick a touch, as made that Clay to live. And both united with such wondrous Art,In part he's Angel, Animal in part. In whom the Bounds of both the Worlds are seen,Where Earth does terminate, and heaven begin. One part, like sprightly Flames, will upward move▪
        Kin to the blest, unbodied Minds above. The other, only shaped and quickened Earth,From moulded Dust receives its humble Birth. Yet Life divine, and high Perfection gains,Ennobled by the Guest it entertains. His Form erect, and Cherub-like his Face,Where sweetness tempered stern and Manly Grace. Miled to be loved, and awful to be feared,He, like some new discovered God, appeared. Then did th' Almighty to his Bosom give,To bless him perfectly, his Consort Eve. 
        Of a more soft and nicely tempered Mould,Her strokes were tender, his more strong and bold. sweetness that ravished, milder than the Morn,And perfect Beauty did her Looks adorn. she like a Goddess, with the heavenly Charms,Of blushing Innocence, comes to his Arms. What Joys Divine did on the Fav'rite wait,These happy Hours that knew his Native state!His Work thus finished, and Creation done,Th' Almighty rests on his Eternal Throne. straight the loud shouts and Acclamations giv'n,shook the high Towers and jarring Gates of heaven. There stood an Alabaster Mount that shone,In th' Air sublime, from the Imperial ThroneRemoved at distance, and between them lay,All paved with stars, a broad, frequented way. Hither for great Assemblies they repair,From all the Regions of the Etherial Air. Here they in perfect Love and Peace debate,Th' Affairs that most affect their sacred state. Hither the Princes of the heavenly Court,Followed with Throngs unnumbered now resort. There met, a solemn Jubilee they Vote,In Honour of the Wonders lately wrought. straight a Procession publick was enjoyned,And thus performed t' adore th' Eternal Mind. Trumpets marched first, and chiefly that whose soundshall strike Convulsions through the trembling ground:Break their dark Prisons down, and call awayTh' awakened Dead, on the great Judgment Day. Next heavenly Viols, soft harmonious Flutes,Resounding Dulcimers, and tuneful LutesAnd Harps, like that which hangs the glitt'ring Pride,As Poets feign, of young Apollo's side. With perfect skill here chosen Cherubs play,And Celebrate th' Almighty's Resting Day. Then the blest Voices came with Hymns of Praise,Angelick Musick, sweet Melodious Lays,such as bright spirits in high Raptures sing,Around the Throne of their Eternal King. Now the first Rank of Potentates and Peers,Mighty Arch-Angels, and high Thrones appears. Crowns of substantial, massy Glory made,Adorned with Gems, and Flow'rs that never Fade,And Greens of heavenly growth all wreathed between,Are on the Heads of this bright Order seen:Fresh Greens and Flow'rs, such as their Gardens bring,Blest with mild Rays, and Everlasting spring. Vials of Incense in their Hands they bare,And the sweet Clouds in Wheels roll up the Air. Odours not to be told, fanned from them fly,And wondrous Fragrancy Perfumes the sky. Each had his Lyre, that from his shoulders hung,With Golden VVire, like radiant sun-beams, strung. such was their splendour, with such grace they trod,In Looks and Motion each appeared a God. Hither thick Crowds of vulgar Angels made,And to admire this glorious Order staid,And, as they passed, humble Obeisance paid. Then lower Ranks in long Procession passed,VVith Crowns and Badges of Distinction graced. And all so splendid, all so Rich and Gay,That heaven before ne'er saw, so bright a Day. Unfading Roses of a heavenly Red,On the bright Pavement were profusely spread. Elysian Jess'mine, and blest Am'rant lay,In od'rous heaps along the Milky way. The Fountains all such Cost was then bestowed,VVith unexhausted springs of Nectar flowed. And now advanced before th' Imperial Throne,That losty with excessive Brightness shone,They from th' uneasie Lustre of the Light,Protected with spread Wings their dazled sight. In prostrate Adoration down they fell,Opprest with Glory unsupportable. Entranced, Transported, Ravished there they ly,And with blest Hallelujahs fill the sky. In songs sublime they praise th' Eternal Mind,His Works from all the Ages past designed,His Greatness, Wisdom, Empire unconfined. His Justice, that no Force or Prayer can move:His spotless Truth, and Everlasting Love. They sing th' Eternal son's Immortal Praise,And to an equal height the sacred spirit raise. Then all arising from the sacred Quire,O'erflowing with unbounded Joys, retireTo the blest shades of the Celestial Bowers,Where oft they choose to pass their happy Hours. Their Hunger here delicious Banquets met,With vast Profusion on rich Tables set,Banquets Divine, not such as Mortals Eat. High Dishes in long Pomp and Order stood,Filled with choice Fruits, rare Meats, all Angels Food. Ambrosial Juices, sweet Nectarean Wine,Ravished their Taft, and made their Faces shine. The sons of God thus cheared, dissolve in Joy,Whilst his high Praises their blest Tongues employ. In Joys and Triumphs so the Day they spend,such Mirth and show the Festival attend;Then when the Ev'ning came, or what insteadOf Evening there, does in its turn succeed. Glorious illuminations made on high,By all the Constellations of the sky,In bright Degrees, and shining Orders placed,spectators charmed, and the blest Dwellings graced. Through all th' inlight'ned Air rare Fireworks flew,Which the Celestial Youth with shouting threw. Comets fly up with their red sweeping Train,Then fall in starry showers, and glitt'ring Rain. In th' Air ten Thousand Meteors blazing hung,That from heaven's gilded Battlements were slung. Here furious, flying Dragons hissing came,Here harmless Fires play in a lambent Flame. such Universal Joy in heaven they shewed,And in such hallowed Mirth the day conclude. In such Delights they pass their time above,And so shall we, if like them, we Obey and Love. In all the Joys that happy Minds attain,Blest Adam first began to live and reign. He to fair Eden's Paradise resorts,Where every sense its proper Pleasure courts. The joyful spring by soft Favonius faned,Diffused her Riches with a wanton Hand. From new-blown Flowers luxurious Odours fly,And heavenly Landskips meet his ravished Eye. The twining Branches weave him shady Bowers,And Hony-Dews fall in delicious showers. Birds with their songs their soveraign salute,From Boughs that bend beneath their Golden Fruit. Pure streams to him their Crystal Waters bring,And the glad Fish leap up, to see their King. The harmless Beasts their humble Homage paid,And the sole Monarch of the World obeied▪
        Uninterrupted Peace his Mind possest,And Joys unutterable filled his Breast. He viewed his great Creator's glorious Face,Clearly reflected from fair Nature's Glass. On her bright Form he saw, th' Impressions shine,Of Wisdom Infinite, and power Divine,Whence all things, as free Examinations flow,As streams their Being to their Fountain owe. Which binds fast Nature's vast unshaken Frame,Lest it dissolve to Nothing, whence it came. Whilst in his Thoughts the pleasing Objects Roll,Fresh Pleasures Feed his still transported soul. His Eyes thus fixt, the great seducer's skill,Could not engage his Thoughts, or move his Will. A Day serene smiled on his heavenly Mind,Dark with no Cloud, and undisturbed with Wind. No Guilt, no Frown from heaven disturbs his soul,Calm as deep Rivers in still Evenings roll. No storms of Passion, such as us molest,Annoys the Peaceful Region of his Breast. No boiling Lust swelled the o'erflowing Blood,To bear down Reason with th' impetuous Flood. His spotless Mind knew yet no other Fire,Then those pure Flames, that heavenly Minds inspire. O happy Man! above description blest,Had he maintained the station he possest. Upon the Crystal River's flowry side,That winding did in slow Meanders glide;As loath to leave the Blissful Place, there stoodA Tree that rose above th' Hesperian Wood,Its Fruit seemed pleasant, but forbidden Food. For he that with enormous Bounty poursOn Man, fresh Pleasures in incessant showers;That nothing can disturb his flowing Joys,Unless Variety suspends his Choice. Bids him not Eat the fatal Fruit, to proveHis due Obedience, and his constant Love. The grand Apostate for high Crimes displaced,From heaven by fierce Almighty Vengeance chased,Till down th' unfathomed Precipice he fellConfounded, to the fiery Gulph of Hell:With Rage and Envy sees Man's happy state,Whence he for ever lost had fall'n so late,Himself undone urged with infernal spight,And dire Revenge, makes Ruin his delight. That he from heaven might this fair Province gain,That sin and Death might wider sway attain,And he his baleful Empire might extend,Concealed beneath the specious Air of Friend,Does to Man's Choice the fatal Tree commend. As such whose Worth transcends the greatest price,The Flower and Beauty of his Paradise. Pleasing to Tast, but much more to the Mind,Which those that Eat, should boundless Knowledg find. Then points up to the fair forbidden Meat,Bids him be Wise, and boldly take, and Eat. He tempts him with the flatt'ring Hopes of Bliss,Great as his God's, and lasting too, as his. This gaudy scene of Glory charmed his Eye,And his proud thoughts at God-like Greatness fly. The bright Illusion turned his giddy Head,And with vast Hopes his vain Ambition fed. Thus gazing at the Glory of a God,The Precipice was hid on which he trod. The splendid Phantome now advances nigh,And in his reach appears Divinity. Which straight he grasps at, and to hold the more,Empties his Hand of what it held before. But sooner might he grasp unbodied Minds,And with closed Arms clasp in the raging Winds. The glorious shadow from his Hands does slide,Mocks his Embraces, and defeats his Pride. He Eat, but did no other Pleasures find,Than the sad Terrors of a guilty Mind. His cheated Hopes can no new Knowledge boast,But of the Ill he feels, and Good he lost. Thus fell lost Man, straight troubled Nature moaned,And shaking, with a strong Convulsion groaned. Ev'n Paradise looked sad, the Herds repined,And lofty Cedars shook without a Wind. The Roses fade, the Golden Apples turnedPallid, and all the sick Creation mourned. To the thick Trees in vain fall'n Adam made,To hide his blacker Guilt beneath their shade. Close Trees may so their well mixt Branches spread,That sun-beams cannot pierce their shady Head. But God's clear Eye needs not so gross a Ray,His Glory sheds a more Illustrious Day. But had he been from his bright Eye concealed,The crying Guilt had to his Ear revealedApostate Man, that Voice to heaven does riseLoud, as the Thunder-claps, for which it cries. What a black Train of VVoes and hideous Fears,Headed by one bold Crime, to Man appears. The serpent's Venom spreads through all his Veins,And sin's Contagion unresisted Reigns. A Death-like Damp shoots through his poisoned Blood,And fears cold Chains Arrest the beating Flood. A dreadful Face of Things confounds his Eye,He cannot stay secure, nor can he fly. Black thoughts of Vengeance seize his guilty Heart,And Conscience wounds him, with her poisoned Dart. Amidst the Trees he starts at every Noise,Grows pale, and thinks he hears th' Almighty's Voice. The trembling Branches make him tremble more,Now feebler, than the Fig-leaves, which he wore. Man's soul, by this rude shock from's Center driv'n,stands so a-skaunt, and so remote from heaven,'Tis scarcely warmed by its weak, Oblique Ray,And has at best but a cold, darksome Day. Fall'n from its bright Etherial seat on high,Down to the lowest Regions of the sky,It feels th' attractive Earth's Magnetick Force,And round this low-hung Ball directs its Course. As when a Planet, once all fair and bright,sickens, and shines with pale and faded Light;By some fierce storm bred in its Bowels rent,As Clouds are by the Thunder in 'em pent. The mighty Orb disjoynted cracks, and allThe broken Parts in Noisy Ruin fall. The hideous, Burning Hull does floating lie,And with the wondrous Wreck affrights the sky. sometimes it blazes with a dismal Light,And then grown dim, seems lost and drowned in Night. Then sinking does the starry sky forsake,Contented some inferior seat to take. Where heaven new moulds the Heap, and from th' Abyss,Calls forth perhaps a Moon, or Earth, like this. so Man seduced by the Impostor fell,From heaven's bright Coasts, to the black Verge of Hell. There he his Lustre lost, and God-like Grace,shews the sad Ruins of a heavenly Face. Where Peace dwelt undisturbed, and smiling Light,Confusion now, Chaos and horrid Night. Black, frowning Clouds, and murmuring Thunder rose,O'er the vext Region of his guilty soul. Fierce, driving storms, and bleak Tempestuous WindBeat on the wasteful Desart of his Mind. Revenge, Despair, Grief, Jealousie, and Fear,Have in their Turns, supreme Dominion here. Reason dethroned must the Commands obeyOf this wild Rout, that holds the sovereign sway. Mean Time, th' Almighty does his summons send,Thro' heaven for all his Angels to attend. High in the Midst of the Etherial skies,A Mount of rocky Diamond did rise:Insuperably steep, and too sublimeFor the tired Wings of Cherubims to climb. O'er-looking heaven's wide Vales and spacious PlainsIt stands, and unmolested Peace maintains. Here the Almighty's bright Tribunal stands,Whence his Decrees are sent, and high Commands. Hence he gives Laws to all the Worlds below,And hence eternal Right and Justice flow. Hence Punishments proceed, and just Rewards,Hence Orders come to all th' Angelick Guards,To keep the Peace of heaven, and next secureOn Earth th' afflicted, from th' Oppressor's Power. And now the Thrones and powers the Vally fill,And stand adoring round the sacred Hill. Adam's Rebellion they had newly heard,And God's fierce Wrath in dreadful signs appeared. Lightnings and Thunders issue from his Throne,Lightnings scarce heard of, Thunder seldom knownTremendous Murmurs, and a mighty soundOf wondrous Ruine from the Hill rebound. T' express incensed Omnipotence conspireWhirlwinds, thick Darkness and consuming Fire,United Terrors, that with Fury brokeFrom the blest Mount, whence thus th' Almighty spoke. The Man I made, and with my Image graced,And next to your Angelick Order placed,Revolting to th' Apostate Prince of Hell,Against my Throne has yielded to Rebel. The Death I threatened, now I must inflict;so Justice bids, nor is its Rule too strict. You're here from all the Regions of the sky,To hear the Rebel doomed, and see him Dye. He spake, and thro' all heaven a Terror strook,The sphears, and all the Frame of Nature shook. The Moon grew Pale, the sun all Dim appeared,And all the sons of God stood Mute, and feared. Th' Almighty his Vindictive Arm makes bare,stretched out his Hand, and did for Death prepare. Mercy shreeked out, and trembling on her FaceFell down, and did with Tears his Feet Embrace,Offspring Divine, in heaven the most beloved,By whom ev'n Fate unchangeable is moved. Her Looks so moving, such Celestial Grace,so mild, and sweet an Air dwell on her Face,so tender and engaging all her Charms,That oft th' Almighty's Fury she disarms. Her Language melts Omnipotence, arrestsHis Hand, and thence his Vengeful Lightning wrests. Then thus she spake:shall the successful, sly Impostor boast,That by his Power the new Creation's lost?shall he thus Triumph in his impious Deed,And all our Hopes defeat from Adam's seed?Must this fair Race be lost, so lately made,And Hell made Bold your Empire to invade?Adam has sinned, and heaven's high Grace abused,But sinned betraied, and by Hell's Fraud seduced. Can't Wisdom Infinite, Expedients find,To punish Guilt, and yet preserve Mankind?Compassion, with stern Justice mixt, will drawHonour to heaven's just Government, and AweAll from offending the Established Law. At this, the Eternal son rose from his Place,The bright Effulgence of his Father's Face,His fair and express Image, full of Grace. In whom Divine, substantial Glory dwelt,And who Almighty Life and Vigour felt. Th' Essential Wisdom, th' Everlasting Word,The Universal Heir, and soveraign Lord. And thus he silence broke, mine be the TaskTo do what Justice and Compassion ask. To rescue Man, my self will Man become,Assuming substance from a Virgin's Womb. A willing sacrifice, I'll Death Embrace,Justice t' attone, and Ransom Adam's Race. The Father straight assented, Mercy smiled,To see the serpent of his Prey beguiled. Justice well pleased, accepts the offered Price,And heaven's atoned by its own sacrifice. The heaven's with loud rebounding shouts did ring,And the glad Angels in new Anthems sing,The Intercessor, and mysterious King. The rolling Years their Circles fill apace,And well-breathed Time runs its appointed Race. Till it brought on the Hour when all should see,The son make good to Man, his blest Decree. That our expected Hope might be enjoied,Divinity appears with Man alloied. His Native Glory darts destructive Light,And bright Oppression pours on Mortal's sight;He therefore draws a humane Veil between,That tempered Lustre might not Kill, when seen. Here two Extreams of distance infinite,In one ineffable, mysterious Knot unite. God lives concealed, within a Mould of Clay,And does in Dust himself, and's Glory lay. He that in all th' expanded skies wants room,Lies now encompassed with a Virgins Womb. Immensity is wrapt in swadling Bands,The Prince by whom the World's wide Fabrick stands,supported in his Mother's Arms we see;And vast Eternity begins to be. He leaves his starry seat, and glitt'ring Crown,And lays his dazling Robes of Glory down. Then in an humble travelling Dress is seenseeking, as unknown strangers do, an Inn. Lord of the World, to whom proud Monarchs oweTheir Crowns and scepters, he that does bestowHonours and Wealth profusely on the Great,Can't for his own Repose, find out a seat,But must from Men, to kinder Beasts, Retreat. No other Court receives the new-born King,That to debase himself, did choose to bringNo other Pomp, but naked Innocence;Nothing for Ornament, or for Defence. He that the Wants of all the World supplies,Himself oppressed with Pain and Hunger, Cries. He Man's Assistance asks in vain, to whomFor Aid and Comfort all th' afflicted come. Angels that did the Royal stranger know,The greatest signs of Joy and Triumph show. The Out-guards of their Camp saw marching roundCelestial splendor rising from the Ground. And gave th' alarm, the shining squadrons flyTo th' Out-lines, and the Frontiers of the sky:To see the wond'rous Mediator Born,Whom they Adore, though stupid Hebrews scorn. some with spread Wings shoot swiftly thro' the Air,And to the shepherds first the Tydings bear,That a great shepherd was at Beth'lem Born,Whose Deeds and Triumphs should that Name Adorn. Tho' Angels sing, obdurate Men are mute,Nor will their saviour, and their King salute. Yet some few famous sages come from far,Conducted by a brigter Morning star,Left all the Wealth and Wonders of the East,To see a greater sun rise in the West. To find the Prince to Herod they resort;For where should Kings be found, but in a Court?But the directing star that led their Way,stands still, and points down with a streaming Ray,To a mean stable, where the stranger lay. Where they with humble Adoration View,The Infant Intercessor, known to few. Whom they present with Odoriferous Gums,Choice spices, and Arabia's rich Perfumes. The sun of Righteousness begins to rise,And streaks with radiant Lines the Purple skies. Here did he from his healing Wings display,The tender dawn of Everlasting Day. Pale Terror through the Courts of Darkness flew,And Hell's sad Regions doubled sorrow shew. Th' Infernal spirits wandring in the Air,As Thunder-struck, in Anger and Despair,With shreeks and hideous Yellings fly the sight,And the keen Horrour of the heavenly Light. Like obscene Birds of Night, they hast awayAnd shun in Clefts and Caves the Rising Day. The Prince of Darkness now begins to fear,The Dissolution of his Empire's near. Th' ambiguous Oracles with Fear struck DumbProclaimed by silence, the Messiah come. Troubled and sad th' Infernal Counsel sate,Thoughful how best t' avert th' impending Fate. Various Projections, deep Designs were laid,How best the dreaded Foe they might invade. They first the Fury Jealousie dispatch,To Herod's Court that might Occasion watch,To kindle strong suspicions in his Breast,That th' Infant from him should his scepter wrestshe did so well perform her Hellish Part,Herod soon yielded to her subtle Art. For while the sages leave their Eastern home,And to admire the wondrous Infant come. Herod, afraid his ravished Crown to loose,The Royal Infant's hated Life pursues. What to pale Tyrants dreadful won't appear,When Love and Innocence can move their Fear. 'Tis true,A King he is, whose Empire's vast Extent,shall pass all Bounds, and last when Time is spent. submissive Monarchs shall their scepters layBefore his Feet, and his Just Laws Obey. Kingdoms opprest shall his strong Aids invoke,And thrust their Necks beneath his gentle Yoke. The Roman Eagles shall the Conqueror own,And Caesar Court him to Ascend his Throne. Admired by all, he shall in Triumph goWhere fruitful Nile, or famed Hydaspes flow,Uncheckt by Africk Heats, or scythian snow. Nations invited by his Fame, shall come,More than e'er made their Court to Conquering Rome,
        In splendid Embassies to sue for Peace,And Worlds unknown his Empire shall increase. The Earth shall banished Justice now regain,And Love and Truth attend the happy Reign. soft Peace and Joy the chearful Earth shall Crown,And savage Beasts shall lay their Fierceness down. The Lyon, Wolf, and Lamb, no more their Prey,And little Infants shall Promiscuous play. The years in Golden Harness smiling pass,And keeping beauteous Order run their Race. Nor shall his Kingdom cease, or subjects dye,For when Time finds its empty Channel dry,And all its disappearing streams shall sleep,Lost and engulphed in vast Duration's Deep. Then shall this King his full Dominion gain,And in Eternal Peace, and Triumph Reign. But 'tis not Worldly Empire he designed,His scepter is his Grace, his Throne the Mind. Kings unmolested may their scepters sway,And Peaceful subjects without strife obey. They may unrivalled, and unenvied reign,And all their Pomp, and Regal state maintain. The great Redeemer has his Court unseen,And reigns in Light, and Heavenly Love within. But from the false Usurper's CrueltyOfficious Angels warn their Prince to fly. He and his happy Parents leave their Home,And all to Egypt's safer Border's come. Egypt, tho' for its Monsters famous grown,Is now by trech'rous Palestine out-done. For here they find a more secure Abode,Egypt once Iacob saved, and now his God. The wandring God returns, the Tyrant dead,To rich Iudea's soil from whence he fled. Where he begins his Kingdom to assert,And his mirac'lous Virtue to exert. The Blind received their sight, their Feet the Lame,And the Dumb spake to celebrate his Fame. Loud storms and Winds were husht at his Command,And fierce wild Beasts did tame and harmless stand. The wondring Dead arise, and hasty come,Obsequious to his Call, from out their Tomb. VVith fresh-created Fish and Loaves he fedTh' admiring Crowd, that lay around him spread. To the Decrepit he new Force appoints,And with strong Nerves new-braced their withered Joynts. His Breath oft cooled fierce Feavers raging Flames,And his sole VVord the deadly Poyson tames. Round him in Crowds the sick and feeble throng,The sick grow easie, and the feeble strong. Fresh healing Vertue he diffused around,And dying Men rose leaping from the ground. The Languishing revived, th' Afflicted cheered,Took healthful Looks, and smiled when he appeared. Demons at his Command vext Men forsake,And to th' Infernal Caves and burning Lake,Their hasty Flight with piercing screeches take. such Miracles did his high Office prove,And Universal Admiration move,Of all the chiefest was his wondrous Love. He whom rebellious Men might justly fear,In all his chosen Terrors would appear,With Military Pomp, and Trumpets sound,His shining Host of Cherubs poured around;Armed with keen Lightning, and the sharpest sword,That all his Magazins of Wrath afford,To lay all Wast before him, and EffaceAll Footsteps of Apostate Adam's Race,He, unexampled Love! Attempts to winMan from the Curse of Death, and Curse of sin,With Pity, more than that of Mothers Hearts,With Mercy's Charms, and Love's perswasive Arts. His high design was with his heavenly Light,To chase away th' Impenetrable Night,That covered this lost World, and re-inspireMan's Frozen Breast with fresh Celestial Fire. Th' Almighty's faded Image to repair,That its bright Lines might shine distinct and fair. To raise lapsed Minds to that high state of Love,Of Light and Bliss, the Blest enjoy above. To pull all bold Usurping Passions down,And settle Reason in its ancient Throne. To break sins heavy Chains, its slaves release,And fix 'twixt Earth and heaven a lasting Peace. The Jews amused with Worldly Empire's Charms,Hoping some Monarch with Victorious Arms,With Roman Pomp and Grandeur would arise,The great Redeemer's humble state despise. Inspired from Hell, his Message they refuse,Deride his Person, and his Deeds accuse. He that supplies on all in want bestowed,Feasting with Miracles the hungry Crowd:Finds from th' obdurate Hebrew no relief,But with the Twelve Companions of his Grief,He walked on his Eternal Purpose bent,scatt'ring his heavenly Gifts where'er he went. Yet did unwelcom through their Regions stray,From those ungrateful Cities thrust away,Whence he had Devils and Diseases cast,Him, and his proffered heaven they from them chased. At last his spotless Innocence traduced,He stands before the Roman Throne accused;On Caesar's King Pilate in Judgment sits,Condemns him, yet his Innocence acquits. To please th' inexorable Jews he shedsBlood, and heaven's dreadful Curses on their Heads. That done, he washed his guilty Hands in vain,The Blood he spilt, alone could Purge that stain. No Form of Cruelty his Foes omit,They give sharp stripes, and on his Face they spit;Which now adoring Angels blush to see,Not for its splendor, but Deformity. To please united Cruelty and scorn,On's wounded Head they fix a Crown of Thorn. They dress him in a Purple Robe, that gone,His Blood with richer Purple dyes his own. A Reed his Hand must for a scepter sway,Which with a Rod of Ir'n shall that Contempt repay. They bow in scorn before him, whilst he sateA Pageant Prince, the mockery of state. What various shapes of Cruelty are shewn,Under, and on his Cross he's made to groan. And yet he bears a heavier Load within,The pressure of the World's united sin. stretcht on the cursed Tree his Body hangs,Groaning its Life away in dying Pangs. Forsaken both of Earth and heaven, his BreathHe wasted in the pains of lingring Death:Whilst on his soul the blackest Horrors dwell,That feels the Pains, without the Guilt of Hell. The Barb'rous Hebrews for whose sake he died,stand by, and see their sov'raign Crucified,Without the slight Compassion of a Tear,scarce in the Crowd does one sad Face appear. Their Insolence dares mock his dying Moans,sport with his Torments, and deride his Groans. Though solid Rocks touched with Compassion rent,The more obdurate Jew does not relent. For Man he Dies, that heaven may be atoned,He dies, the Universe afflicted groaned,heaven's Everlasting Frame shook with the Fright,And the scared sun shrunk back, and hid his Light. Thro' th' Earth's dark Vaults a shiv'ring Horror fled,That whilst Convulsed threw up th' awakened Dead. Thin pallid Ghosts come sweeping o'er the Grass,And howling Wolves Glare on them as they pass. Hoarse Thunder Rolls in subterranean Caves,Chaos to hearken stills his Raging Waves. Ev'n Hell gaped horribly, such was the fright,And thro' the Chasm let thro' prodigious Night. Night that extinguished the Meridian Ray,And with its gloomy Deluge choaked the Day. sad Moans were heard, shreeks, Howlings, Midnight Cries,And Globes of Fire hung Blazing in the skies. A fierce Convulsion thro' the Temple went,The Pillars trembled, and the Veil was Rent. The heaven's and Earth both suffered when he died,As Nature's self were with him Crucified. Down by their sides the silent Angels laidTheir Golden Harps, and neither sung nor plaied;Their drooping Wings, and Looks dejected showsadness, as much, as those blest Realms can know. Thrice the swift sun his radiant Chariot droveO'er the blue Hills, and out-stretched Plains above. As oft the Moon had shot her paler Light,In silver Threads thro' the brown Vest of Night. When the Reviving saviour leaves his Tomb,And, as new-born, breaks from the Earth's dark Womb▪
        The Chains of Death shook off, he from the Ground,Do's with new Force, Anteus like, rebound. He comes in Triumph from the Conquered Grave,And this blest proof of Resurrection gave. Oft to his mournful Friends their Lord appeared,And their sad Minds with heavenly Pleasures cheered. He then the Plan of his wise Kingdom laid,Who should submit, and who should be obeied. To these he gave a Power to loose, and bind,And with fixt Bounds that sacred Power confined. He set the Rights his subjects should enjoy,Which Princes must Protect, but not Annoy. And by wise Laws fix all things that relate,To the support of his new founded state. That done, pursued by their admiring Eyes,Born on a shining Cloud he did arise,In heavenly Pomp Triumphant thro' the skys. The Clouds dividing in Obsequious Haste,smiled, yielded by his Glory, as he had passed. Great Michael, Raphael, and the rest that boast,The chief Commands in the Celestial Host,Great Princes, Thrones, and high seraphick states,With splendid Equipage poured from the Gates;sublime in high Celestial Chariots rode,Far out of heaven, to meet th' ascending God. The powers and high Dominions with their Train,shone glorious bright on all th' Etherial Plain. On a fair Hill that the wide Vale commands,The numberless, angelick Army stands. Drawn up in shining Lines, and Warlike Bands. The Trumpets all salute him passing by,And in the Air displaied the Banners fly. And now arrived at heaven's Eternal Gate,Attended with his long Triumphal state,The blest Inhabitants due Honours give,And all in Arms their conquering Prince receive. Disposed in glorious Ranks each Order shines,And all the way the bright Militia Lines. On's Chariot Wheels the thronging Cherubs hang,With whose loud shouts the heaven's high Arches rang. Thus did he to th' Eternal's Palace rideThe Guards stood to their Arms on either side. Entring he took his Place, and Brightly shoneOn the Right Hand of his great Father's Throne. Where he shall our great Intercessor stay,Till the last summons to the Judgment Day. He ceased, and Hoel in his Arms embraced,His God-like Friend, and cried, I'm highly gracedWith this Divine Discourse, what Thanks to you,Illustrious Prince, what Thanks to heaven are due?Blest Peace came rolling on the raging Waves,And your late Wreck, me and my Kingdom saves. Kind heaven for me hath called forth Joy and Light,From those fierce storms, and that outrageous Night,That forced your Vessels on th' Armoric shore,Your Loss I mourn, but heaven's Designs adore. Long have I straied in gloomy Darkness lost,Deep Gulphs, thick Woods, and trackless Mountains crost;In endless Mazes, and in endless Night,Without a Glimpse of Day, or Ray of Light. The Gates of Light thrown open, you displayThe first reviving Beams of heavenly Day. Which darts across the shades in shining streaks,And on my Mind in tender Dawning breaks. How much I wish to see this Light Divine,Rise to its Noon, and in full splendor shine?You've opened heaven's Eternal springs, whence flowThose sacred Rivulets which you bestowOn the parched Region of this barren Breast,Now with pure streams of living Waters blest. I drink them in with Joy, but thirst for more,And for this thankful, still more Aid implore. He ceased, the Prince who to oblige him strove,Thus spake, all seasons offered I'll with Joy improve,To give more Light, and kindle greater Love. My Toil and sufferings when reviewed, will please,Caused by the stormy Winds and angry seas,If I can thus assist your heavenly Course,Thro' gloomy Night, thick Mists, and Tempests force,Thro' all the snares of Hell, till you attainTh' Eternal Haven, where blest spirits Reign. Now to the Foot of heaven's steep Precipice,Ready to plunge into the deep Abyss,The Red-faced sun had rolled the sinking Day,shooting along the Plains a level Ray. The loving Turtle to his Airy Nest,Flies with his moaning Mate, to Coe, and rest. The timorous Hare steals from the Brakes to Feed,And from the Yoke the lab'ring Ox is freed. With strutting Teats the Herds come lowing home,And Beasts of Prey o'er Hills and Forrests Roam. And now the Princes that had passed the DayIn various talk to Conda came, to stayTill the appearance of the Morning Ray. "
"7","Prince Arthur. BOOK III. NOW the Victorious sun the Night invades,Chasing from Hill to Hill, the flying shades. Up rose the Princes, and were soon preparedTo take their Way, attended with their Guard. In the same Chariot friendly they abide,And feeding grateful Conversation ride. The British Captains, and th' Armorick Train,On either side their generous Coursers rein. They past not far, when Hoel thus addrest,With pleasing Looks, his Pious, British Guest. Your losty subject now, brave Prince, resume,How shall your Lord from heaven to Judgment come,What follows, what precedes the general Doom?The Briton then began. Before the son of God appears on high,Prodigious signs are seen thro' all the sky. New lighted Comets shake their Fiery Hair,Or trail their flaming Trains along the Air. Vast Circling Flakes of Fire the World amaze,And intermixt, prodigious Meteors blaze. The sky shines terrible with Lightning's Flame. And Thunder shakes the universal Frame. Th' impetuous roar o'erturns heaven's lofty TowersAnd starry Fragments fall in burning showers,Rent Clouds, pour seas of raging sulphur down,Whose livid Flames th' extinguished sun-beams drownCross the red Air the flaming Torrents fly,Gushing from all the fiery springs on high. The melting Orbs, and Firmaments conspire,To make up one Tempestuous sea of Fire,The glowing sphears dissolve with Heat and allIn mighty Floods of liquid Crystal fall. The lofty Digues gape wide, that stood around,And from the dark Abyss did Nature bound;Chaos came pouring thro' the hideous Crack,And Nature's Ruins, and th' amazing WreckOf burning Worlds, by floating on his Waves:scarce its high Mounds th' Empyreal Region saves. heaven's spacious Balls are on each other hurled,Ruin with Ruin crushed, and World o'erturned with World. Confusion, Noise, and Horrour fill the Air,The Earth, loud Cries, Distraction, and Despair. Fierce storms of raging Vapours, that aspire,Mixt with hot steams, from subterranean Fire,That Lakes of sulphur burning all beneath,That kindled Naphtha, and hot Metals Breath;The Earth's griped Bowels with Convulsions rack,And with loud Noise their trembling Prisons crack. Imprisoned Thunder roars for wider room,Proclaiming loud the World's approaching Doom. The Globe distorted, burst, disjoynted, rent,Gives to the burning Exhalations Vent. Thro' gaping Clefts, the flaming Tempest flies,And Hurricanes of Fire confound the skies. Great Cities, Mountains, Rocks, and shattered Hills,Vast abrupt Tracks of Land, and sinking Isles,saped by the Flame, that underneath destroys;Fall down with mighty Cracks, and dreadful Noise;Prodigious Ruin filling all the Caves,And dashing high the subterranean Waves. Aetna, Vesuvius, and the fiery kind,Their Flames within blown up with stormy Wind;With dire Concussions, and loud roar complainOf deadly Gripes, and fierce consuming pain. The lab'ring Mounts Belch drossy Vomit out,And throw their melted Bowels round about. Broad sheets of Flame, Pillars of Pitchy smoak,And glowing stones, the Airy Region choak. Down their scorcht sides metallic Torrents flow,And form a dismal, flaming sea below. The fiery Deluge rolls along the Ground,Dreadful for Colour, horrible for sound. Huge stones, and vast unmelted Cakes of Oar,The thick, unweildy Tyde encumber more. Horrour in Triumph, smeared with smoak and Blood,Rides cross the Ridge of the Tremendous Flood. It burns new Channels riding o'er the Plain,And turns o'er Cities with its pond'rous Train. Down to the Deep it rolls its massy Waves,Outroars the Ocean, and its Waters braves. Plunged in the seas it unextinguished lies,And o'er the Waves the glowing Wedges rise. Th' affrighted seas the burning Horrour fly,And the bare shores beneath the Deluge Fry. Into the Air th' exhaling Ocean goes,Where Waters slept, a Lake of sulphur glows. All the hot seeds, and hidden stores of Fire,From subterranean Prisons freed, conspireWith their bright Arms to lay all Nature wast,And to the general Conflagration hast. A fiery Chaos Reigns with lawless Power,And unresisted Flames the World devour. These signs first giv'n, amidst the starry shears,With all the Pomp of heaven the Judge appears. Before his Chariot Wheels that roll on high,Whirlwinds, and Clouds discharging Thunder fly,And curling Lightnings run along the sky. Immortal Thrones, poured out from heaven's bright Gates,Dominions, Powers, seraphic Potentates,Crowned saints, and Martyrs ranged in glorious Rows,Attend his Chariot, and his state compose. The dazling Pomp stretches across the sky,From utmost East to West, and passing byThe heavenly Orbs, comes on descending flow,Into the Airy Region here below. O'er all the sky, heaven's mighty Army shines,And here it halts in deep embarteled Lines. In bright Celestial Armour Clad, they stand,Their swords of tempered Flame drawn in their hand. They mark a Camp of spacious Circuit out,And cast up Crystal Ramparts round about. On some fit Eminence, they raise on highTheir Lord's August Pavilion in the sky. His bright, sublime Tribunal here they place,On which he sits, with awful, God-like Grace. such Flames of Fire, wheeling in Clouds of smoak,Issue from thence, as from Mount sinai broke. Arraied with Majesty, and cloathed with Light,He Glory darts too fierce for Angels sight. In Hallelujahs they his Greatness sing,And the shook sphears, with loud Hosannahs Ring. Thus on the Throne, the saviour sits prepared,To Judge the World, to punish and reward. And now th' unnumbered Armies ready stand,Grasping revenging Firebrands in their Hand,And only wait their Leader's high Command. The signal giv'n, a general shout, shall shakeThe heaven's around, greater than Armies makeRushing to Battel, or was heard in Rome,
        When Conquering Caesar came in Triumph home. Their furious Arms, devouring Tempests throwOn all the guilty, trembling VVorld below. They pour down mighty, fiery Cataracts,Flaming Bitumen, and sulphureous Lakes;Red showers of fiery Arrows hissing fly,And flashing Lightning flames around the sky. Fires from above, combined with Fires below,O'er all the Earth in ruddy Torrents flow. Vengeance Divine, wasts Nature's burning store,And drowns the Earth in Fire, all drowned in Guilt before. The Heat dissolves the Fabrick of the World,The broken parts fall down, confusedly hurled:Chaos restored does in wild Triumph reign,And ruined Worlds his hideous Throne sustain. some great Archangel now springs forth on high,And with the loudest Trumpet of the sky,summons th' astonished, gazing World to comeTo Judgment, and the Universal Doom. The dreadful Noise shakes heaven's Etherial Mounds,And in loud Ecchoes from the sphears rebounds. In Ecchoes terrible, and piercing shrill,That the low World with dire Amazement fill. The guilty Fiends shreek out at these Alarms,That in the Air fly thick in murmuring swarms. Their Prince himself trembles, and dares not stay,But spreads his broad, dun Wings, and shoots away. They sink confounded to th' Infernal Deep,Or into Clefts, and hollow Mountains creep. They find the fatal Hour's arrived at last,That shall revenge their bold Rebellions past. When to their Torments they shall be Restrained,And lye beneath, on flaming Billows chained. VVhen Hell no more its Pris'ners shall release,And sin's black Empire must for ever cease. No less the dreadful sound, and awful sight,Confound proud Tyrants, and their Guards affright. What Horrour now distracts each guilty soul,In their sad Breasts, what storms of Vengeance roll. How will they bear this dismal scene of Wo,Where will they stay secure, or whither go?Terrour, Distraction, Anguish, fierce DespairDrink up their Vitals, and their Heart-strings tear. Ten Thousand poisoned Darts strike thro' their Reins,And wound them with unsufferable Pains. The Vulture bred within their Bowels gnaws,And Conscience gripes them with her Harpys Claws. such Wounds, such stings, such Pangs must now be born,Of everlasting Death, the sad Forlorn. What strange Confusion in their Looks appears,What wild Amazement, Guilt and deadly Fears. What howling Lamentation, what dire Cries,What doleful shreeks, and Yellings fill the skies?Besides, the Trumpet shakes the trembling ground,The startled Dead awaken at the sound. The Grave resigns its ancient spoils, and allDeath's Adamantine Prisons burst, and fall. The souls that did their forced Departure mourn,To the same Bodies with swift Flight return. VVhose scattered Parts God calls together, theyTo their appointed Meeting hast away. The crowding Atoms re-unite apace,All without tumult, know, and take their place. Th' assembled Bones leap quick into their Frame,And the warm Blood renews a brighter Flame. The quickened Dust feels fresh and youthful Heats,While its old Task, the beating Heart repeats. The Eyes enlivened with new Vital Light,Open, admiting whence they had their sight. The Veins too, twine their bloody Arms aroundThe Limbs, and with red, leaping Life abound. Hard twisted Nerves new brace, and faster bindThe close knit Joynts, no more to be disjoyned. strong, new-spun Threds Immortal Muscles make,That justly fixt, their ancient Figure take. Brisk spirits take their upper seats, and dartThro' their known Channels thence, to every part. The Men now draw their long forgotten Breath,And striving break th' unweildy Chains of Death. Victorious Life to every Grave resorts,And rifles Death's unhospitable Courts. Its Vigour thro' those dark Dominions spread,From all their gloomy Mansions frees the Dead. Now ripe Conceptions thro' the Earth abound,And new sprung Men stand thick on all the ground. The sepulchers are quick, and every TombLabours with Life, and grows a fruitful Womb. But how the Dead are changed, their Bodies moreUnlike each other, than their souls before!How monstrous foul the guilty Dead arise,Each struck with Horrour from his Neighbour flies!How much deformed they look, all stained with sin,Black and mis-shaped without, but more within. Ugly and Fiend-like, from their Graves they Crawl,And on the ground, like bloated Vermin, sprawl. And like them too, their Bodies have their Birth,From putred Damps and Vapours in the Earth. so serpents that entangled lay asleep,From out their Beds disturbed, and wakened creep. They hiss, and cast their fiery Eyes around,And with their loathsom Bellies mark the ground. For flight their poisonous Volumes they display,And urged with Fear and Anguish, hast away. so this foul Brood are forced their Graves to leave,And to the Ground their grov'ling Bellies cleave. Earthy and Black, confined so long to Night,They dread the Horrours of the chearful Light. Amazing change! see, some of these were they,Whose Heads were Crowned, whose Hands did scepters sway. These did rich Purple, and fine Linnen wear,And every Meal fed on delicious Fare. That hideous Thing, that for a Covert seeks,With hollow Eyes, fal'n Jaws, and ghastly Cheeks,That monstrous Thing, was once, when kept with Care,Proud of its Beauty, and looked wondrous Fair. set off with all the Ornaments that pleaseThe Eye, and pampered with Luxurious Ease. But how the guilty Crowd, wreckt with Despair,With dismal Cries fill all the Ecchoing Air;When they the Trumpet's dreadful summons hear,And find the Universal Judgment near!Back to their Graves, the ugly Monsters fly,And in those Coverts would for ever ly. They call aloud for Death, and wish they mightMelt to thin Air, be drowned, and lost in Night. But when Blest Minds their Bodies meet, no PairCan look more Beautiful, and charming Fair. The happy souls shoot swiftly thro' the sky,And to the Graves and sepulchers they fly. Where they their long forsaken Bodies greet,Which, like old Friends, they with fresh Pleasure meet▪
        Bodies, that seem, they are so Pure and Bright,All thickened Glory, close compacted Light;Purged and refined from all that's course and gross,As melted Gold throws off the baser Dross. smiling they rise, such Charms, so sweet a GraceThey shew, as dwell not on a Mortal Face. These rising stars their heavenly Beams display,Bright Harbingers of Everlasting Day. such Beauties, such mild Glories shall we see,In the glad spring of Immortality. Yet these blest sons of Light, that Angel-like,Would mortal Eyes, with deadly Lustre strike,Were those, that once their Excellence disguised,Lived here oppressed, and like their Lord, despised. Welcom to them this long expected Hour,safe by their Judge's Favour, from his Power. High Tides of Joy into their Bosoms run,And Everlasting Life they feel begun. This shall past Griefs in deep Oblivion drown,Compleat their Triumphs, and their Virtues Crown. These in the spring, great Care and Toil bestowed,And watered with their Tears, the seed they sowed. The Harvest now their happy Hours employs,In reaping Pleasures and Immortal Joys. Bright Cherubims descending thro' the AirTo these blest Men with speedy Flight Repair,Then to the gen'ral Doom aloft they fly,And on their Wings convey them thro' the sky. In all the way encouraging their Charge,Telling of all the Joys of heaven at large. Placed in the Presence of their Lord they standIn their appointed seats, at his Right-hand. VVhilst other Angels from the Deep of Hell,Drive up the Fiends that in those Regions dwell. VVith swords of keenest Flame compelling some,And dragging others to the gen'ral Doom. In Anguish and Despair the yelling FiendsCurse, Gnash, and Bite th' Eternal Chain that bindsso close, and strait, then turn their Heads away,From the fierce Terrour of so bright a Day. And impious Men in no less Horror flyTo all the shades, and Coverts they descry. Mountains and Rocks their fruitless Cries invite,To fall, and hide them from the Judge's sight. For rise they must, and lose their vain Desire,Caught up in Whirlwinds, and in storms of Fire. Before the Judge the Pris'ners stand in sight,And take the Left-hand, as the Just the Right. Th' Eternal Books before the Judge are brought,Where all Mens long forgotten Deeds are wrote. And first are read the Vertues of the Just,Their Zeal for heaven, their Courage, Hope, and Trust. The Prayers, the Tears, the Alms themselves concealed,Before applauding Angels are revealed. The righteous Judge their Innocence declared,Allots the glorious Kingdom he preparedFor pure and holy Minds a blest Reward. Their Guardian Angels at their Lord's Command,Crown the glad saints with an Officious Hand. Who now in perfect Bliss their time employDiscoursing, to promote their mutual Joy,How first they left the pleasurable way,Where wanton streams of soft Delights conveyCharmed souls, that with the treach'rous Tyde must go,To the dead Lake of Pain and endless VVo. How first they liked the dark and lonesom RoadThat leads to Bliss, and the blest Minds Abode. How when in shades they mourned, a heavenly RayDarted a welcome, tho imperfect Day. How Vertue's guidance they implored and gained,And what blest Converse with her they maintained. How thro' dark Paths she did their Feet conduct,Correct the wanderers, and the rest instruct. How by her Aids they bore tempestuous shocks,Climbed o'er opposing Hills, and hanging Rocks. Till they at length the Peaceful Realms did gain,VVhere Joys Divine, and endless Transports Reign. How sweet and fair Crowned Innocence appears,No more tost on the VVaves of Hopes and Fears?On mortal Face such Beauties never shone,Like those of Virtue, seated on her Throne. Next this, th' Apostate Angels are accused,That open Force, or secret Arts they usedTo set their Leader on th' Eternal's Throne,subvert Christ's Empire, and advance their own. That Man by them seduced, did first Rebel,Relinquished heaven, and to their Party fell. That they the curst Defection did support,And new Born Men, to new Rebellions Court. That they, with indefatigable Care,Fresh Heats fomented, and renewed the War. Whence Plagues and Desolation wide, and vast,And uncontrolled Destruction laid all wast. Hence Noah's universal Deluge came,And hence the World lies now o'erwhelmed in Flame. For these black Crimes they're sentenced to the pains,Of fiercer Fire, and doomed to heavier Chains. Next Cain's Rebellious Offspring are accused,As heaven's inveterate Foes, that long abusedGoodness Divine, whom Everlasting LoveAnd Life Eternal, had no Charms to move. They would no reconciling Terms embrace,Alike by Threats unchanged, or Acts of Grace. They did with Wine and Noise the Method find,To Calm a Conscious, self-revenging Mind. To lay asleep th' uneasie Judge within,Till they with Care and Pains, grew bold in sin. For when the sacred spirit did conveyInto their Breasts, a secret heavenly Ray,That did, where cherished, soon bring on the Day:With hasty Care they choaked the new sprung Light,Calling to Aid the shades of Hell, and Night. Divine Compassion's Force they never felt,Nor would in Flames of Love Eternal melt. Their Hearts untouched did all heaven's strokes repel,Tempered, and hardened in the Forge of Hell. No Overtures of Peace, no Offers made,Tho' of an endless Kingdom, could perswadeThe unrelenting Rebels to lay downTheir impious Arms, to take a heavenly Crown. They still asserted with their latest Breath,Their fixt Confed'racy with Hell, and Death. 'Tis on them charged, that others too that fell,Drawn by their Arts, embarked for Death and Hell. They led them to the flowry Banks, and showedThe flatt'ring Tide, where smiling Pleasures flowed. Where the charmed Voyagers did careless ride,Bewitching syren's singing on their side. Till the false Flood betraied them thither, whereIt falls into the Gulph of black Despair. Here secret Crimes are published, and his NameThat loved the sin, but feared th' attendant shame. The sly Adulterer, that til the lateApproach of Night, and silent shades did wait,For the Caresses of the Harlot's Fed,And at the early dawn of Twilight fled;Is here upbraided for his careful flightOf Mens, whilst he contemned th' Almighty's sight. Th' audacious Wretch that did heaven's Laws deride,And all its Thunder and dire Threats defied;That did cloied Nature to fresh Guilt excite,Beyond her own ev'n Vicious Appetite:Anti-Platonic that could pleasure takeIn naked Vice, and sinned for sinning's sake;That could abstracted from Enjoyment, sportWith Guilt, and Vice ev'n in Idea court. That did himself, so much he loved the Fame,The secret Triumphs of his Lusts proclaim,strives in the Crowd to hide his guilty Head,Whilst his high Charge, and black Indictment's read. Th' astonished Wretch sinks, Trembles, Dies to seeEnraged Omnipotence, and frowning Majesty. such deadly Torments on his Bowels feed,such Agonies he feels, as far exceedAll shapes of Horrour, Mortals ever saw,Poets invent, or troubled Fancies draw. That there's a God, he gives a full Assent,On the most sure, but saddest Argument. He can his Being, and his Power attest,From the Almighty Vengeance in his Breast. Thus he at last believes, and trembles too,On the same grounds that tortured spirits do. The Droll'ry that derided heaven's just Cause,He hears repeated, but without Applause. His Jests and bold Discourses will not fitThis place, nor pass, ev'n with his Friends, for Wit. Will he his feeble Arguments produce,And make them here, renew their former Use?Will he assert his Innocence, and plead'Twas only harmless Nature he obeied?That he to Vice did not his Mind enslave,But only pleased the Appetites heaven gave. Will he inform the Judge, it cannot beA Being Good, and Merciful, as He,Can so much Rigour to his Errors show,And make a Creature for Eternal Wo?The Wretch's bold Objections will appear,His wanton Fancy's wild Capriches here. Able no more to stifle with their Night,The Natural Dictates of his inbred Light. They can't the deadly stings within controul,Nor ease the Horrors of his tortured soul. And now less hardy Pris'ners are Arraigned,That had not this obdurate temper gained. Of such a Pendulous, Distracted Mind,That oft to heaven, and oft to Hell inclined. To make up Peace, they would with neither part,But shared between them a divided Heart. These travelled on so long the happy Way,That leads to Life, and pure Etherial Day:Till they reached heaven's bright Confines, could descryThe Peaceful World of Immortality. But then discouraged at the steep Ascent,And the strait Gate, thro' which the Trav'llers went,Gave back, and did of their past Toil repent. But how they now abhor the Cowardize,That made them almost Conquerors, miss the Prize:Made them desert a prosperous Cause as lost,That could so many spoils, and Triumphs boast. Curst sloth, that could perswade them to forsakeChrist's Camp, when such a Kingdom was at stake. Each hears his aggravated Crimes at large,Devils accuse, and Conscience backs the Charge. They can't excuse, or hide their Crimes, nor fly,Nor what's the Refuge of the wretched, dy. Now let their past Enjoyments succour give,Let Wit, and Wine their deadly Fears relieve. Let their dear Riches their Assistance lend,Honour and Pomp th' ambitious Man defend. Let them solicite with their loudest Cries,Those Gods, they served, to save their Votaries. Blest heaven, that Man with such a swift Career,Pursues those Toys, that are so useless here. The Judge will all his Terrors now assume,And thus pronounce the Pris'ners dreadful Doom. For ever cursed souls from me depart,As you did oft my Cause, I you desert. Go, burn in Everlasting Fire preparedFor Devils, take that sad, but just Reward. sink to the Bottomless Abyss of Hell,Where Agonies, and endless sorrow dwell. Go to those Mansions of Despair, and lieIn never ceasing Torments, go, and die. The Rebels this expected sentence past,With Thunder and Tempestuous Fire are chased,To Hell's black Gulph, thro' all th' Etherial Wast. Where they shall see no chearful Ray of Light,Doomed to the Horrours of Eternal Night. Th' Almighty's Arrows Fester in their Heart,Drink up their Blood, and gall with deadly smart. His Wrath consumes the wretch, his Power sustains,And like fierce Poison o'er their Vitals, Reigns. They wast their souls in Cries, and howling Moans,And spend Eternity in fruitless Groans. Now the abstrusest Paths of Providence,That gave the wisest Men so great Offence,Are so unriddled, and made easie here;The Night dispelled, they shine as Noon-day, clear. Justice that did till now her Graces shrowd,And walked on Earth, encircled with a Cloud;That did such by, and uncouth Ways frequent,Perplexed with Windings, frightful for Ascent;see this bright Goddess to her Throne restored,Unveils her Majesty to be adored. Her Cloud thrown off, her Form is all Divine,No Lustre now, her Glory can out-shine. such are the Beauties of her Charming Face,Fair Mercy's self, looks not with sweeter Grace. Rivals no longer, they are here combined,And in so strict a Bond of Friendship joyned;They seem distinguished only by their Name,Their Charms alike, their Votaries the same,And both are Worshiped with an equal Flame. Justice to all in such due measures shown,The Judge returns to his Celestial Throne. And as he goes, crowned saints, and seraphs singLoud songs of Praise to their Triumphant King. He enters heaven attended with his Train,That in the new Ierusalem shall Reign. The City stands on pure expanded FieldsOf rising Ether, that wide Prospect yieldsO'er all the Gulph, and outstretcht Vales below,O'er all th' Inferiour, spacious Orbs can show. The Walls are Marble of the richest Vein,And their high Towers o'erlook the Azure Plain. Of polished Gold the glorious structures rise,With gilded spires, and Turrets in the skies. From heavenly Quarries on their Front appearRich stones, like Winter stars, but far more clear. Immortal Rubies, Diamonds, saphirs meet,In beauteous Mixture, and bright Orders setRare Works, where Cost immense, and Art combine,Built and adorned by th' Architect Divine,To be for holy Minds a blest Abode,Th' Imperial seat, and Residence of God. The streets are all of fine, Etherial Glass,Pure, like the spotless Minds, that thro' them pass. Thro' these Eternal, living Rivers flow,Trees on their Banks, in goodly Ranges grow,That with their golden Fruit, immortal Health bestow. Twelve Gates of Orient Pearl unshaken stand,shut, and unbarred by the Almighty's Hand. A steepy Gulph is placed beneath the Walls,And down as low as Hell's Abyss, it falls;Lest Hostile Fiends should leave their burning Lake,And bold Excursions to these Regions make. The Air's serene, and fit for happy Minds,secure from Thunder, and th' Assaults of Winds. No Clouds, but those of curling Incense rise,By playing Zephirs tost about the skies;That with their gentle Breath sweet Odours blow,That from Blest Woods, and heavenly Gardens flow. No noxious Damps, the Region's so sublime,From Hell's Infernal Caves, can hither Climb. No foul terrestrial steams pollute the Air,No Breaths ascend, but those of Praise, and Prayer. Essential Glory from th' Almighty's Face,With its resplendent Efflux, lights the Place. All heaven's fair Orbs, thined and beat out in Light,Would not spread out a Day, so pure and bright,As that, the saints Illustrious Order sheds,From the encircling Glory round their Heads. The vanquished sun would there seem Dark, his LightWhence our course Day proceeds, would there make Night. so Glorious are the Dwellings of the saints,Outdone by nothing, but th' Inhabitants. On lofty Thrones the heavenly Princes sit,In Robes as white, as new fall'n snow, and writIn Golden Characters, their Foreheads bearTheir saviour's Name, their Breasts his Image wear. Immortal Vigour shines on every Face,They look with Mild, but with Majestick Grace. Thick Beams of Light stream out from every Head,Each saint does his own heaven about him spread,His radiant Feet on pointed Glory tread. safe on the shore with Pleasure they behold,How the thick Waves are on each other rowled,What Dangers of a strange amazing shape,What fatal Rocks, they scarcely did escape. They hear the Winds grow loud and turbulent,see Clouds swoln big, with Thunder in 'em pent,With which the lowring sky is over-cast,Hang down upon the seas that they have past. Viewing these Woes themselves did once endure,They stand surprized, as if not yet secure. Amazed at all the Glory they possess,Wonder almost suspends their Happiness. They on so sweet, and rich a Climate thrown,Forget their Dangers, now for ever gone. Th' Almighty they enjoy, at whose Right HandFulness of Joy, and Life Eternal stand. Down from his Throne, as Light does from the sun,Rivers of fresh Delight for ever run. With ravished Eyes they drink in heavenly Beams,That from his Face flow down in Glorious streams. They gaze so on the Beatifick sight,Till they become all Intellectual Light. so long they his substantial Brightness view,Till they all grow Divine, and God-like too. so quick they feel the mighty Influx come,The most Capacious, thirsty souls want room. They widen and extend themselves to holdThose Floods of Joys, that to their Breasts are rolled;Till they a vast, unmeasured Bliss possess,And strive beneath th' unweildy Happiness. If but a Glimpse of heaven whose Glory streamsThro' the thick Clouds in weak, refracted Beams,Can please so much, what Joys have those aboveWhere perfect Knowledge kindles perfect Love?Transports Ineffable their Minds employDeluged in Glory, lost in Tides of Joy. Here Innocence will all its Lustre show,The mournful Looks thrown off, it wore below. sorrows for ever banished hence repairTo the low, Guilty Regions of the Air. There no black Clouds of Discontent appear,That spread themselves o'er these dark Vallies here. No Groans are heard, no Tears fall down the Face,To interrupt the Joy, of this blest Place. No crossing Arms, or sad dejected Eyes,seek out the secret Corners of the skies. If Course, Terrestrial Pleasures, court the senseWith such strong Charms, that few can make Defence,When backward Nature's forced by Wit, and Art,All her delicious Treasures to impart. When the short Days in all Delights are spent,That soft, Luxurious Asia can invent. What are the Nobler Pleasures, that transportThe blest that reign in this Celestial Court?That no Decay, or Intermission know,Debased, when likened to the best below. The Clouds all broke, the Tempest chased away,The smiling skies disclose a chearful Day. They've changed the Defart's dry and barren sand,For all the Riches of a fruitful Land. Where with Immortal Food they ever fed,And drink pure Pleasures at the Fountain's Head. Hatred, Distress, and Grief, are banished hence;The sad Companions once, of Innocence. No dying Martyrs Flames, or private CriesOf Innocents opprest, disturb the skies. Here our Delights are mixt with base Allay,We have at best but a Tempestuous Day. Our sweets are still attended with a sting. And great Enjoyments, greater sorrows bringDelights, those Beautiful, Illustrious playAround us, and when grasped, they glide away. Here tempting Joys, our fond Embraces fly,Choice, Forraign Flowers, they only Blow, and Die. They shew themselves, but will not with us dwell,But, like hot Gleams, approaching storms foretel. Pure unmixt Pleasures on us never flowed,But stream like watry sun-beams, thro' a Cloud. But those above, see no unlovely day,Their Joys no mixture know, nor fear Decay. In those blest Realms they know no thoughtful Care,Ever to Triumph is th' Employment there. There no Vicissitude of Day, and Night,No Years, or Ages, measure heaven's Delight;Time has quite finished, and gone thro' its Round,It did their Grief, but can't their Pleasure Bound. Its streams here disembogued for ever lyLost in th' Abyss of Immortality. They no sad fears of future sorrows know,Compleatly Happy, and for ever so. For Ever!We strive in vain to hold this Boundless space;Too wide and vast, for Mortals to Embrace. Our Arms may clasp the Earth with greater Ease,And spread themselves ashore round all the seas. When Ages have their widest Circle run,heaven wears not, still its Joys are but begun. The Heros here forget their toil and pain,And in Eternal Peace, and Triumph reign. No more the scoffer mocks their pious Care,As Native Dulness, and ungrounded Fear. How different Fate he and the Impious Kind,Chained in the dark Infernal Prisons, find?Near the wild Deep where restless Atoms fight,And th' unfrequented Coasts of ancient Night,Where Nature ne'er on Pregnant Matter fate,To hatch warm Life, and its straight Bounds dilate. There stands the vast, unbottomed Gulph of Hell,Where sin and Death, in all their Terrors dwell. Beyond the Verge of Day, these Regions ly,As low and black, as heaven is bright and high. Horror, and Night hang dismal o'er the place,And grisly Forms fill all the gloomy space. Dead seas of pond'rous Darkness lie around,And the sad Realms from Light's grey Frontiers bound. Darkness that blunts the sharpest pointed Ray,And unannoied, repels th' Invading Day. The sluggish Air is choaked with soultry Gleams,With poisonous Damps, and suffocating steams;That from wide Lakes of boiling sulphur rise,Laden with Groans, and Everlasting Cries. No such malignant Breaths, such deadly Reeks,The delving Miner that hid Treasure seeks,E'er let out from a subterranean Cell,As those that break from the black mouth of Hell. A fiery sea burns fiercely all beneath,Blown up, and kindled by th' Almighty's Breath. In flaming Heaps the livid Ocean rolls,And scalding Waves involve despairing souls. The boiling Floods terrific Colours shew,some deeply Red, and others faintly Blue. These with the shades contend, but can't dispelThe Darkness that surrounds the burning Cell. Or if they do, they dart pale, dismal Light,Worse than the Horrors of the blackest Night. The troubled Whirlpool belches Burnings out,And throws red seas of sulphur round about. Columns of smoke, with spiral Flames of FireInwreatched, from wide-mouthed Furnaces aspire. Hence the black Region is annoied with Fumes,stench, Reeks, and Flame, that kills, but not consumes. so when a Mount, hot with metallic seeds,In its rich sides a secret Burning feeds;soultring within, it casts up Pitchy smoke,And the dead Air ascending Vapours choak. In mighty Floods, the wide Volcano's throwTheir melted Treasures out, and overflowWith glowing Torrents all the Neighbouring ground,That lies beneath a burning Deluge drowned. Thro' all the Air the liquid Riches fly,And Floods of Fire dash thick against the sky. All Hope for ever banished flies this place,And fixt Despair sits Pale on every Face. Grief, Anguish, Terrour, shame, Confusion here,In Forms more terrible than Death, appear. Here hateful sin throws off its flatt'ring Charms,And shews a Monster in the sinner's Arms. It now no more can please awakened Eyes,stript of stoln Beauties, and the fair DisguiseOf promised Good, it does it's self discloseIts hideous shape, and ghastly Visage shows. Th' affrighted sinner seeing, faign would flyTh' Embraces of such foul Deformity. He would forget their past Endearments now,And from the Monster strives in hast to go. But 'twill not be; those Friends on Earth must dwellFor ever, sad Companions too, in Hell. This fiery Gulph, was as their just reward,For Lucifer, and his black Host prepared;Where now the Fiends, once fairest sons of Light,Lye plunged in Flame, chained in Eternal Night. These wretched Minds, once pure and free from stain,In the brightest Palaces of heaven did Reign. Arraied with dazling Brightness, there they dwelt,Blest with their great Creator's sight, and feltThe beaming Influx breaking from his Face,And shared the Pleasures of that Blissful Place. Till with the task of blest Obedience tired,They to th' Eternal's sacred Throne aspired. Incensed with such ambitious Aims, their Lordstrikes thro' the Rebels with his flaming sword. Headlong he casts them from the seats above,No longer now, the Creatures of his Love. Flaming, and Thunder-struck, the Traytors fell,And sunk down to the fiery Jaws of Hell. As when strong rising Flames Resistance find,Beat downwards, by a fierce, impetuous Wind. The liquid Pyramids with labour bendTheir tops, and sink still struggling to ascend. so did these Beings of a heavenly Race,Fall from the Regions of their Native Place. still working up, they sunk in Pain and Toil,For downwards thrown, their Natures still recoil. so difficult's an Angel's Fall, and thussinking's to them, what rising is to us. But who has strength t'oppose th' Almighty's Hand,Who can against his deadly Terrours stand?He with a single Word, an angry Frown,subdued this Host, and cast them headlong down. Confounded, and amazed they sink, and allheaven's Plagues, and Wrath, pursued them in their Fall. Here they must lie far from the Coasts of Bliss,Chained in the Dungeons of the dark Abyss. Where now they feel what Guilt's Demerits are,Weltring in Fire, and tortured with Despair. How much they curse the sad Exchange, black Night,
        And endless Death, for heavenly Ioy and Light. 
        sunk deep in liquid Fire they list their Eyes,Red both with Heat and Anguish, to the skies. Then rave aloud, to think what Joys they've lost,To think how dear their bold Rebellion cost. Nor is the Change of these two Dwellings such,so great, but they themselves, are changed as much. see how deformed they are, to what before,stript of the Glory that in heaven they wore. How much they look too like their guilty state,How foul, and how unlike themselves of late. such fatal Changes one bold Crime can make,heaven's lost, nay more left for a burning Lake. Man's Crime th' Infernal Gates did open lay,And raised, and paved, a broad and easie Way;Leading a-cross the Gulph from Earth to Hell,Where now, lost Men, with impious spirits dwell. A Way that's thronged with mighty Crowds of those,That for Delight and Ease, this Passage chose. In sports and Mirth they journey on, and findAll the Delights that please a Vicious Mind. The Way's so wondrous smooth, so prone and broad,They rather fall, than travel down this Road. But how surprizing is their Journey's End,To what dire seats does this smooth Passage tend?Down to th' Infernal Gulph they sporting glide,Born on enchanting Pleasures wanton Tyde. A sad Exchange they meet, outrageous seasOf sulphurous Fire, for Luxury and Ease. In Darkness chained, on flaming Billows tost,Too late they find themselves for ever lost,Hopeless they rave, and Curse the easie Way,That did their Feet to these sad Realms betray. Hither the damned, the final sentence past,With Cherubs bright, revenging swords are chased. Pursued with everlasting Wrath, they takeTheir woful Refuge, in the burning Lake. Transfixt on unextinguished Fire they ly,Burn without Wast, without expiring dy. Those Agonies, those Terrours here they know,That from a self-revenging Conscience flow. Griped with the sad Remembrance of their sin,They feel the stygian Viper gnaw within. With deadly stings, th' Almighty wounds their Hearts,And in their Breasts sticks deep his Fiery Darts. Along their Veins tempestuous Vengeance rolls,Pouring Despair, and Horrour on their souls. Who can with everlasting Burnings dwell,And bear the Guilt, and Punishment of Hell?What strength or Courage can support the LoadOf Wrath inflicted by th' Almighty God?Hear how the Damned devoured with Plagues, beginTo Curse aloud their Judge, Themselves, their sin. Transported with their Anguish, Grief, and shame,They gnash their Teeth, and bite the raging Flame. Then sunk in deep Despair, such sighs they breath,such dismal Groans, that but to hear, is Death. A secret Fire their Breasts, like Aetna, feed,And like that too, do their own Thunder breed. Their Hellish Nature its own punishment,Is a worse Plague, than Furies can invent. Their Lusts, like Vultures, tear their inward parts,And never-ceasing Torments, rend their Hearts. Their vicious Appetites, not yet destroied,still crave the Pleasures, they on Earth enjoied. Though those are gone, the fierce, untamed DesireRemains, and burns worse than their Lake of Fire. But what's the most afflicting Plague of Hell,With all these Woes, they must for ever dwell. For Ever! fatal state, for Ever! whoCan bear the Doom of Everlasting Wo?What deadly Pangs, what fierce Convulsions rendTheir Breasts, who know their Pains shall never end. How the despairing Damned cry out, is thisThe place we chose, instead of heavenly Bliss?Is this black Prison, these tormenting Chains,This Lake of Fire, and these Eternal Pains,The dismal Recompence our Crimes afford,And must we thus curst, tortured, and abhored,In these consuming Flames, these Torments ly,To all the Ages of Eternity?Curst be the fatal Crimes, that we obeied,That stole our Hearts, and have our Lives betraied. Curst be the transient false Delights that shewedThe Charms, that we so greedily pursued;Till down the steepy Precipice, we fellInto this deep Abyss of Death, and Hell;Curst be the treacherous Joys, that leave us nowDoomed to Despair, lost in Eternal Wo. He ended, Hoel highly pleased, exprestThe grateful sense, that filled his joyful Breast. Methinks he cried, I view th' Infernal Caves,And see the damned float on the raging WavesIn the dire Lake, where flaming Brimstone rolls,And hear the dismal Groans of tortured souls. Then looking up, I see the Blest above,Dissolved in Raptures of Eternal Love. I seem to view their bright, triumphant Throngs,And hear their Harps, and sweet Harmonious songs. Then he the Briton various questions asks,Who with great Joy performs the pious Tasks,He teaches sacred Myst'ries yet behind,And stamps the Christian Image on his Mind. "
"8","Prince Arthur. BOOK IV. IN such divine Discourse, on things sublime,The Royal Pair with Pleasure passed their Time. Now the day wears, the sun-beams faintly bound,And taller shadows stretch along the ground. Advanced, the rising Eminence they gain,That gave full prospect o'er the fertile Plain,Where the Imperial seat of Hoel stands,And all the soil and Towns around, commands. Fair Liger the Armoric Region's Pride,Does thro' the Vale in smooth Meanders glide,And rolls his silver Volumes by its side. Here the Nannetian Heroes did of old,For Arms and Wisdom famed, the scepter hold. Arthur the structures height, and Pomp admires,The lofty Walls, strong Towers, and glitt'ring spires. He views the rich and fruitful Region round,Where wanton Nature sate in pleasure crowned,scattering with lavish Bounty on the soil,Riches and Joys, without the Owner's Toil. To Martial sports by thirst of Honour led,The active Youth o'er all the Fields are spread. some of robuster Limbs advance their NameIn wrestling Rings, the famed Olympick Game. some rein their managed steeds with manly grace,some swift in running strain to win the Race. some hurling pond'rous Balls their Fellows brave,some twang the Bow, and some the Colours wave. But all desert their Games, and Warlike sport,And round the Kings, run shouting to the Court. Which was an ancient, stately Pile, that stoodOn the sweet Banks of Liger's peaceful Flood. Alighted here, th' Armoric Prince exprest,All signs of welcom to his Royal Guest. He leads him to a fair and spacious Room,Hung with rich Pieces, from the finest Loom. Rare Workmanship, where famed sydonian ArtDid all her Force, and happy strokes impart. Each piece fresh Pleasure, and new Wonder feeds,Filled with th' Armoric Kings Heroick Deeds. Their great Exploits in single Combate done;The Towns they conquered, and the Fields they won. Pleased with the skill, aud story, Arthur stands,And much of this, and much of that, demands. Mean time, within a supper they prepare,With great Magnificence, and Regal Fare. strong, brawny servants sweat, and panting strode,O'erburdened with the Meats unweildy Load. The Iv'ry Tables groan beneath the weightOf high piled Dishes, all of massy Plate,In decent Order set, and Princely state. All things appear, that curious search can find,Or in the Finny, or the Feathered Kind:That Hills, or ransacked Forests can impart,Profusely heaped, set off with costly Art. Of Polished Gold Capacious Goblets shine,With sparkling stones enriched, and sparkling Wine. 
        Delicious Fruit crowned with fresh Laurel stoodIn lofty Pyramids, a golden Wood. Great Lights in silver sconces placed on high,shine round the Room, and more than Day supply. The Kings both sate, the Britons take their place,The other side th' Armoric Captains grace. Chearful and highly pleased they sit, and Eat,And now the Art they praise, and now the Meat. Choice Instruments, some strung, and some of WindWere heard, in sweet melodious Consort joynedThe lively Hoboy, and the sweet-mouthed Flute,
        The sprigtly Violin, and warbling Lute;With the sonorous Viol, mingling sound,soft Airs, and heavenly Harmony compound. But that which Arthur with most pleasure heard,Were noble strains, by Mopas sung the Bard,Who to his Harp in lofty Verse began;And thro' the secret Maze of Nature ran. He the great spirit sung, that all things filled,That the tumultuous Waves of Chaos stilled. Whose Nod disposed the jarring seeds to Peace,And made the Wars of hostile Atomes cease. All Beings we in fruitful Nature find,Proceeded from the great Eternal Mind;streams of his unexhausted spring of Power,And cherished with his Influence, endure. He spread the pure Cerulean Fields on high,And Arched the Chambers of the Vaulted sky. Which he, to suit their Glory with their height,Adorned with Globes, that reel, as drunk with Light. His Hand directed all the rolling sphears,
        He turned their Orbs, and polished all the stars. 
        He filled the sun's vast Lamp with golden Light,And bid the silver Moon, adorn the Night. He spread the Airy Ocean without shores,Where Birds are wafted with their feathered Oars. Thro' the transparent Deep light Vapours riseFrom the warm Earth, and cloud the smiling skies. He sung how some chilled in their Airy flight,Fall scattered down in pearly Dew by Night. How some raised higher, sit in secret steamsOn the reflected points of bounding Beams;Till chilled with Cold, they shade th' Etherial Plain,Then on the thirsty Earth descend in Rain. 
        How some, whose parts a slight Contexture show,sink hov'ring thro' the Air, in fleecy snow. 
        How part is spun in silken Threads, and ClingsEntangled in the Grass in glewy strings. How others stampt to stones, with rushing soundFall from their Crystal Quarries, to the ground. How some are laid in Trains, that kindled flyIn harmless Fires by Night, about the sky. How some in Winds blow with impetuous Force,And carry Ruin where they bend their Course. While some conspire to form a gentle Breez,To fan the Air, and play among the Trees. How some enraged grow turbulent, and loud,Pent in the Bowels of a frowning Cloud;That cracks, as if the Axis of the WorldWas broke, and heaven's bright Towers were downwards hurled. He sung how Earth's wide Ball at Iove's Command,Did in the midst on Airy Columns stand. And how the soul of Plants, in Prison held,And bound with sluggish Fetters lies concealed,Till with the spring's warm Beams almost releastFrom the dull weight, with which it lay opprest,Its Vigour spreads, and makes the teeming EarthHeave up, and labour with the sprouting Birth:The active spirit freedom seeks in vain,It only works and twists a stronger Chain. Urging its Prison's sides to break away,It makes that wider, where 'tis forced to stay. Till having formed its living House, it rearsIts Head, and in a tender Plant appears. Hence springs the Oak, the Beauty of the Grove,Whose stately Trunk, fierce storms can scarcely move. Hence grows the Cedar, hence the swelling Vine
        Does round the Elm its purple Clusters twine. Hence painted Flowers the smiling Gardens bless,Both with their fragrant scent, and gawdy Dress. Hence the white Lilly in full Beauty grows,Hence the blue Violet, and blushing Rose. 
        He sung how sun-beams brood upon the Earth,And in the Glebe hatch such a numerous Birth. Which way the genial warmth in summer storms,Turns putrid Vapours, to a Bed of Worms. 
        How Rain transformed by this prolifick Power,Falls from the Clouds, an animated shower. He sung the Embryo's growth within the Womb,And how the Parts their various shapes assume. With what rare Art the wondrous structure's wrought,From one crude Mass to such Perfection brought,That no part useless, none misplaced we see,None are forgot, and more would Monstrous be. such was the splendor of King Hoel's Feast,Which ended, Arthur straight retires to rest. Hoel not so, but with the Britons sate,Asking of Albion's past, and present state. Much he inquires of their intestine Jars,Much of the Picts, and of the saxon Wars. At last, requested Lucius to relate,Prince Arthur's story, and King Uter's Fate. Lucius began, the rest attentive wait. How sad a task do your Commands impose,That must renew unsufferable Woes?That must our Grief with fresh Affliction feed,And make your generous Heart with pity bleed. Whilst I the dismal scene of Ills disclose,And bleeding Albion's ghastly Wounds expose. The cruel Foes in telling would relent,And with their Tears, the spoils they caused, lament. Pity would Picts and saxon Breasts invade,And make them mourn, o'er the dire Wounds they made. But since you're pleased to hear our Country's Fate,I'll pay Obedience, and our Woes relate. Great Empires, like their Founders, Mortal are,And the sad marks of Age, and sickness bear. Their strong Foundations mouldring wear away,And saped by Time's devouring Teeth, decay. Triumphant Rome, with Pomp and Grandeur crowned,Proudly surveied the Conquered World around. The Cold and Burning Zone obeied her Arms,And either Pole trembled at her Alarms. Where storms can beat, or angry Billows foam,Where sails can fly, or savage Beasts can roam,Proud Tyber's swelling Tide no Banks withstood,That o'er the Globe rolled her Victorious Flood. To so sublime a pitch of Power and Fame,Rome's wise and valiant sons advanced her Name. sons, that she bore when vigorous Youth did crownHer Limbs with Beauty, and with strength full grown. Enervated with Age and Vice at last,she found her strength, and Youthful Vigour wast. Decrepit grown, a puny withered RaceFeeble of Head and Arms, her Womb disgrace. Of all her Romans, Rome remains bereft,Old Names alone, with modern Vices left. The Noble scipios, and brave Caesars gone,A starv'ling Brood puts their great Titles on. Her Legions now can no new Triumphs sing,Her molting Eagles hang their sickly VVing. To break her Yoke the Provinces rebel,Those she invaded, now she can't repel. Fierce Northern storms chastise old Tyber's Pride,And to its Banks chase the retreating Tide;Loud, foaming Torrents, from high scythian Hills,From bleaky Continents, and frozen Isles,
        In one vast sea combined, come pouring downAnd Rome's fair Cities, and rich Valleys drown. A barbarous Flood of Vandals, Goths, and Hunns,
        Their Banks broke down, the Provinces o'er-runs. As a tall Oak that Young and Verdant, stoodAbove the Grove, it self a Nobler VVood. His wide extended Limbs the Forrest drowned,shading its Trees, as much, as they, the Ground. Young, murmuring Tempests in his Boughs are bred,And gathering Clouds frown round his lofty Head. Outrageous Thunder, stormy VVinds, and RainDischarge their Fury, on his Head, in vain. Earthquakes below, and Light'ning from aboveRend not his Trunk, nor his fixt Root remove:But then his strength worn by destructive AgeHe can no more his angry Foes engage,He spreads to heaven his naked, withered ArmsAs Aid imploring, from invading Harms. From his dishonoured Head the slightest stormCan tear its Beauties, and his Limbs deform. He rocks with every Wind, while on the groundDry Leaves, and broken Arms lye scattered round. so Rome decaied. Britannia's warlike Youth on this pretence,Is called off from her own, to Rome's defence. Till the exhausted, weak, deserted Isle,Tempted fierce Neighbours, to an easie spoil. Britannia of her Valiant son's bereft,Exposed to every Ravisher is left. The savage Foes, that did her Anger dread,And from her Arms, to Wilds and Mountains fled,Now leave the Coverts, where they sculking staid,And roaring out, th' unguarded Land invade. A cruel Rout of Northern scots, and Picts,
        The direful marks of barb'rous Rage inflicts. Their Arms from Blood and Ravage never cease,Where once they basely crouched, and fawned for Peace. Wide Ruin, Desolation, Rapine, spoilRage in the Bowels of th' unhappy Isle. so Wolves, the faithful Mastiffs gone, grow bold,And fiercely leap into th' unguarded Fold. The trembling Flock they seise with eager Claws,And tear their mangled Limbs with ravening Jaws. Till they stand panting with th' uneasie load,O'ercloied with Carnage, and opprest with Blood. Britannia thus dishonoured, spoiled, distrest,And by her proud, insulting Foes opprest,Is forced of stronger Neighbours to imploreThat Aid and Help, she used to lend before. Urged by her Fate, and hard Necessity,she dreads th' Expedient, that she's forced to try. Hard fate of Princes, that to prop their stateOpprest and sinking, heap on greater weight!Fatal Distemper, where we seek for EaseFrom Drugs, more dangerous than the sharp Disease. A VVarlike Race in frozen Climates bred,Leaving their Wilds, by Valiant Captains led,A fertile soil, and milder Regions sought,And won the happy seats for which they fought. Bold by success, that waited on their Arms,They still advanced in thick, Victorious swarms. Till seas as wild, opposed their Torrent's Force,And watry Banks restrained their rapid Course. They stretcht their seats along the Belgian Coast,No soil, can more of Nature's Favour boast. No Region's blest with more Indulgent Beams,With fatter Glebe, with more, or sweeter streams. 
        The Warlike saxons here their Empire reered,With Plenty crowned, and by their Neighbours feared. King Vortigern unable to opposeThe barb'rous Picts, and fierce Albanian Foes,With humble Language, and rich Presents praiedThis mighty Nation, to afford him Aid. The saxon Princes with his prayer complied,Britannia was too fair, to be denied. As Friends they landed on our naked Coasts,And still poured on their fresh, unnumbered Hosts. They chased indeed the barb'rous Picts away,But seized, themselves, the Kingdom as their Prey. The Lyon's Title to the Crown they plead,As Friends received, as Conquerors obeied. No more let states vext with Intestine Wars,Call in great Princes to compose their Jars. What Britons by their sad Deliverance won,Was by a stronger Foe, to be undone. 'Tis true, opprest, they did their Wrongs resent,But 'twas too late, their Counsels to repent. Britannia's weak, precarious King obeyThe proud Protector's Arbitrary sway. Our Forts, and Navies, and the chief Commands,Were, on Pretence of Caution, in their Hands. Th' insatiate Leeches do for ever crave,And for their service, ask us, all we have. Our strength is spent, and barb'rous AvariceDraws all our Wealth into her deep Abyss. Rapine and Murder all our Cities fill,Our haughty Friends take leave to spoil and Kill. These dire Protectors armed with Lawless Power,The Plowman's Hopes, and Merchant's Gains devour. What we prepare, the ravenous Harpys eat,And from our frighted Children tear their Meat. We starve and dye, while they possess our Food,Grow sleek with Ease, and Fat with spoil and Blood. Villains dishonour Virgins in our sight;And bloody Ruffians break our Doors by Night. To seek redress, and of our wrongs complain,Was but to add Derision to our Pain. How bitter then were sad Britannia's Moans,What deep fetched sighs were heard, what deadly Groans?Betraied and ruined by a treacherous Friend,We saw the Error that we could not mend. VVe curst our Folly, but we curst too late,And all that our mistake should imitate. We wished ten Thousands Woes and Plagues might lightOn their curst Heads, that should again inviteVictorious Kings, with Forreign Arms to blessTheir Native Country, and their Wrongs redress,They'll readily assist your Cause, and fightTo do, to injured states, and Princes, Right. But still they keep, what by their Arms, is won,Great Monarchs conquer for themselves alone. They want a fair Pretente to seize the Prey,They come as Friends, but will as Masters stay. Thus Albion fared, may heaven her sons restrain,From splitting on this fatal Rock again. In vain we strove to break the servile Yoke,Our impotent Attempts new Wrongs provoke. At last, no greater Evils left to fear,We took fresh Hope, and Courage from Despair. Fury from Ruin sprung raged in our Veins,And Death's seemed lighter than the saxon Chains. Each free-born Briton thought the Choice more brave,To die their Victim, than to live their slave. We that could ne'er the Tyrant's Yoke endure,Boyl with Revenge, now slaves to Forreign Power. King Uter's Breast swells with distracting Rage;Whose wounded soul, no Language could asswage. Ashamed his Country's Freedom to out-live,He takes the Councils, Grief and Fury give. His Knights together called attentive wait,While Uter sits on his high Chair of state. His troubled Looks revealed his inward Wound,And storms of Fury on his Forehead frowned. Who thus began, you see what Tides of wo,What angry seas o'er all your Country flow. Th' insulting saxon claims our Land, and drawsFrom greater power, the Justice of his Cause. Thro' all our Towns our Foes triumphant ride,Wearing their awful Title by their side. They shed your Blood, and helpless Maids deflower,Exhaust your Treasure, and your Land devour. A faithless Nation, that no Rule of RightReveres as sacred, but superiour Might. We oft our Fate in bloody Fields have tried,But heaven has Vict'ry, to our Arms denied. Egyptian Plagues lay wast our ruined Land,No Moses here, holds his controlling Wand. Humbly invoked heaven will perhaps relent,And of its fierce, accustomed wrath repent. Perhaps the saxons Crimes with louder Cries,For greater Vengeance importune the skies. Let us howe'er make one strong Effort more,Our Country's Peace, and Freedom to restore. We'll take the Field, 'twill gain us greater Fame,To perish there, then here, with Grief and shame. My British Heart can't brook th' Inglorious Chain,I'll fall with Honour, or with Honour reign. Tumultuous Passions, Wrath, Revenge, and shame
        Invade our Breasts, and our galled souls inflame. strait, with one Voice we all for Arms declare,And every Breast already feels the War. Resolved to make the vanquished saxons fly,Or in the just and brave Attempt to dy. With Fury urged, we part from Uter's sight,Resolved for Freedom, and our Native Right. Thro' all the Towns we spread the loud Alarm,And animated all our Men to Arm,To vindicate their ravished Country's cause,To banish Forraign Gods, and Forraign Laws. 
        'Tis strange, how soon the Britons Blood was fired,What Life and Hope their drooping Hearts inspired. They saw fair Liberty extended ly,The saxon Whips and Torments lying by. They view her squallid Face, exhausted Veins,And beauteous Limbs eat in, with rusty Chains. They heard her mournful Groans, and piercing Cries,Her interrupted sobs, and dying sighs. They saw from gaping Wounds the gushing BloodEnrich the Pavement, with a noble Flood. While Pity, Mercy, Hope in sorrow drownedTo finish the sad scene, stood weeping round. The Britons rave, resolving her defence,And vow her Rescue at their Blood's expence. In Albion this fair Emp'ress still obeied,An uncontested scepter ever swaied. As Universal soul she Life diffused,And Warmth to all the heaving Mass infused. she ever gave to all true Britons HeartsMore Vigour, than their own warm Blood imparts. 'Tis quick'ning Liberty, that gives us Breath,Her Absence more, than that of Life, is Death. 
        such love to Liberty the Britons show,such were her Charms, and may they still be so. May never Briton ceasing to be Brave,submit his Neck, content to be a slave. May those be doubly curst that would betrayTheir Country's Freedom, to a Forraign sway. Our Men enraged, in numerous Bodies meet,Arm, Arm, was heard the Cry in every street:The Ploughman hastens to a nobler Toil,Unyokes his Ox, and leaves untilled the soil. Abandons all his Hopes, and rustick Care,Lays down his Goad, and shakes the warlike spear. 
        The Tradesman quits his shop, and takes the Field,
        And makes his thirst of Gain, to thirst of Honour yield. Armed Tenants crowd about their Valiant Lords,
        And full of Courage, wave their threat'ning swords. Near sorbiodunum's stately Walls, a TownFor strength and Beauty, of the first Renown,Whose spacious Plains rich seas of waving Corn,
        And lowing Herds, and woolly Flocks adorn;Our Universal Rendezvous was set,Where all our squadrons, and Battalions met. Mean time the Cautious saxon was alarmed,And to dispel the gathering Tempest, armed. Octa the famous Hengist's son, a boldAnd warlike Prince, did then the scepter hold. Hengist that did the first our Land invade,And brought to Albion his destructive Aid. The Fifth from mighty Odin, whose great Name,Had tired the flaggy Wings of weary Fame. The stock, from which a Race Illustrious springsOf numerous Hero's, and Victorious Kings. That founded Empires, and that living ledTheir Conquering Armies, and their God, when dead. They soon the Hills by their long Marches gain,And with their Troops o'erspread the spacious Plain. We with their hasty March alarmed, prepareTo guard our Camp, and wait th' approaching War. Our Parties now in rude Rencounters triedTheir Courage, still th' advantage on our side. Th' advancing Host at last appeared in sight,But Toil and wearing Day, defered the Fight. Now Night advancing, draws her sable TrainAlong the Air, and shades th' Etherial Plain. King Uter with his Lords in Council sate,Things of th' important Juncture to debate. Where Measures were concerted to opposeWith warlike Arts, and Force, th' impending Foes. Their Provinces the great Commanders share,And from the Council to their Posts repair. Where they their Troops dispose, and Orders give,How the Invading saxon to receive. Encampt we lay on advantageous Ground,With strong Entrenchments, and high Works around. Our chearful Troops great Joy and Courage show,And from the Works defy the powerful Foe. All things disposed with Military Care,We wait in Arms, th' approach of Day and War. Now did the Morn disclose her smiling Ray,And from the East let forth th' important Day. To bloody Labour all things did invite,And sounding Trumpets Martial Heat excite. heaven's starry Roof resounds with warlike Noise,With Horses Thunder, and their Riders Voice. The saxons and the Britons stand prepared,Those to Attack, and these, their Posts to Guard. King Octa leads his numerous Army on,And at their Head in dazling Armour shone. Drawn on the Right our ranged Battalions stood,Our Left a River Guards, the Rear, a Wood. Octa here makes his warlike Columns halt,Detaching Horsa to begin th' Assault. Whose chosen Troops a furious Onset make,With no less Brav'ry, ours sustained th' Attack. They mount our Works, and our high Ramparts scale,And with projected Fires our Men Assail. Our Troops unbroken stout Resistance make,And always forced th' Invading saxon back. As when a Mold repels th' Invading seas,Protects the ships, and gives the Harbour Peace. The foaming Tempest on high Billows rides,And storms with watty Troops, it's lofty sides. Th' unshaken structure all their Fury braves,And stops the Current of th' Insulting Waves,The angry seas break on th' Opposing shore,And beaten back with Indignation roar. No less unmoved our Valiant Britons stood,Against the Insults of the saxon Flood. Fresh Bodies still poured on, their loss supply,But still Repulsed, they from our Trenches fly. Enraged, about our Lines King Octa flew,To find where best he might th' Assault renew. To see what place lay most exposed, and whereOur Troops did on the Works but thin appear. As when a Wolf pinched by Nocturnal Cold,And Hunger-starved, scours round the lofty Fold. He licks his rabid Jaws, and seems possestAlready of his Prey, and bloody Feast. He offers oft to enter, while the Lambs
        Affrighted, tremble round their bleating Dams. so Octa thirsts for Blood, and scouring round,surveys our Lines, and well observes the Ground. Now with fresh Rage his Troops our Walls ascend,Which we with showers of Darts and stones defend. What shouts, what noise of Arms the Air confound?What Ruin, what slain Heaps deform the ground?The Earth grows slippery all distained with Blood,Which fills the Ditches with a Crimson Flood. The Dead make Bulwarks, which the living Climb,That in the Air, rise like our Walls, sublime. O'erpowered and weakened by the Men they lost,And Faint with Toil, the Britons quit their Post. Thrice the Invading saxon forced our Lines,And to their Arms, thrice Victory inclines. The Valiant Uter that had still withstoodTheir fiercest Troops, all smeared with Dust and Blood. Who still to Posts of greatest danger flew,And with unerring Arms their squadrons slew. Who spread fresh Life and Vigour where he came,And in our Breasts renewed the Martial Flame. For where we saw his shining Arms appear,Our Men revived, and straight forgot to fear;Observing his disordered Troops retired,His boiling soul distracting Passion fired. He spurs his furious steed, and Thundring thro'The thickest Ranks of the Victorious Foe,stay, foolish Britons, stay, he cries from far,save yet your Country, and renew the War. Come follow me your King, I'll lead you on,And chase the saxons from the Posts they've won. The Britons Hearts were touched with generous shame,Love to their Country, and to Martial Fame,With noble Ardor does their souls inflame. Their Leaders Rally all the Troops that fled,And Charge the Foe, King Uter at their Head. With unresisted Fury they AttackThe saxon Troops, resolved to force them back. Now what Destruction, what wide Ruin reign,What heaps of slaughtered saxons load the Plain?Now armed with hissing Death thick Arrows flew,And outstretcht Arms as fatal Iavelins threw. Then what vast Havock did the sword employ?What Troops did Uter's single Hand destroy?What severed Limbs lay scattered on the ground,What streams of Blood gush from each ghastly wound,What shields and spears in the red Deluge drowned?Here first brave Arthur did his Courage prove,His Age then fitter, for the Field of Love. God-like his Face, and God-like was his Mind,
        To virtuous Deeds, and warlike Games inclined. The Down-of-Manhood on his Face appears,And blooming Beauty graced his youthful years. Yet wise and manly, far beyond his Age,His early Deeds the Hero did presage. Till now the Woods and Forrests were his Joy,Where he the savage Kind strove to destroy,That did the Herds, and bleating Flocks annoy. He chased the Fox, the ravenous Wolf and Bear
        His Country's Pest, died by his fatal spear. 
        The People blest him, as a saviour sent,And thought kind heaven, some great Deliv'rer meant. He ne'er before had braced the Helmet on,Nor in the Field in polished Armour shone. His sword had ne'er been stained with humane Gore,Nor had he griped the shield, or Gauntlet woreHis Country's Cause, and Military Fame,Invite the Youth to chase a nobler Game. No more his thoughts his rural sports pursue,Tyrants and savage Men he'll now subdue. For warlike Toil he leaves the gameful Wood,And flesht his Courage first in saxon Blood. The greatest Captains the brave Youth esteemed,He fought like Mars, though Mercury he seemed. Like some fair Cherub, or the Beamy God,He waved his flaming sword, and thro' their squadrons rode. His youthful Veins Heroick Ardor fired,And more than humane Force his Breast inspired,For the great Deeds his fatal Arms archieved,Were by th' amazed spectators scarce believed. At last amidst the Foe advanced too farAlone he long sustained th' unequal War. surrounding Throngs the fainting Youth opprest,And showers of Death flew pointed at his Breast. His weary Arm supports his shield with Pain,And his bruised Armour streams of Blood distain. Here the young Hero had been crushed, and allOur Hopes and Joy had perished in his Fall;Had not brave Malgo a Dimetian Chief,Forced the thick Foes, and flown to his Relief. Then, when the warlike Youth was most distrest,And Elfrick's sword was falling on his CrestWith dreadful sway, Malgo its Fury broke,And on his shield received the mighty stroke. The Prince thus guarded from the fatal Blow,Bold Malgo's spear transfixt th' audacious Foe. Groveling in Death he murmured on the Ground,And poured his Life out, from his gaping Wound. Here Vortipor advancing did attackTheir plying Troops, and forced the saxon back. While Octa's wavering Men began to yield,And to pursuing Uter quit the Field. As when a Lyon, that with Fury ranTo seise by Night, some weary Caravan,That lay encampt on an Arabian wild,Repulsed by Fires, and of his Prey beguiled,With hideous Roar he raves at his Defeat,Oft stands, looks back, and makes a sour Retreat. King Octa's soul like Indignation fired,That raving with his vanquished Men retired. But, oh, how soon was this serener DayBy Clouds, and rising Tempests chased away?How short a space could we our Conquest boast,How soon were all our Hopes of Freedom lost?Won by the potent Charms of saxon Gold,Carvil his Prince, and Native Country sold. He in Indulgent Uter's Bosom lay,And did the secrets of his Breast betray. He on his Conduct, and his Faith relied,In Peace and War alike his treacherous Guide. He held the most important Trusts of state,Nor could his Treasons Uter's Love abate. Unhappy Prince, that still his Foes believed,Only by Ruin to be undeceived!To Friends ingrate, his Foes be entertained,Thus lost the one, but not the other gained. Wisely undone, he knew his Friends too late,By his own Prudence managed to his Fate. Our Prayers and Warnings tired his Ears in vain,Persidious Councils only could obtain. Rough Truth, and loyal Bluntness galled his Ear,That only soft, melodious sounds could bear. His firm and loyal Friends, though hardly used,Looked on enraged, to see their Prince abused. Though some grown cold, ceased to lament his Fate,For Will and Choice, Compassion still abate. Pity a Prince whose Virtues shone so bright,should let so dark a Cloud obscure their Light!To him and us this Weakness fatal proved,That Men suspected were imploied and loved. so Carvil was. Who laboured after Octa's late Retreat,To more than balance his, with our Defeat. The Traytor during all the bloody Day,Found not the Means, our Army to betray. But when the sun drew off his radiant Train,And left the Empress of the Night to reign. Then Carvil opened his black scene of Guilt,Wherein such seas of British Blood were spilt. He by confiding Hands to Octa sent,To let the saxon know his dire IntentTo give him Entrance to our Camp by Night,Whither his Arms he did with speed invite. Octa whose Arts and purchased Treasons won,More Towns and Battles, then his sword had done. so fair a season offered, not delaied,But straightway marched our Army to invade. Carvil mean time his Creatures had prepared,To yield the Posts, their Duty was to guard. Revolving Cynthia with her doubtful Light,Had now o'erpassed the Noon of wearing Night. When Octa's chosen Troops approached the Gate,Where to admit their Arms the Traytors wait. The furious saxon straight our Camp invades,Beneath the Covert of the silent shades. Their unexpected Arms our Men assail,Dissolved in sleep, and wearied with their Toil. What Carnage now the raging saxons make,Our Camp converted to a bloody Lake. They first the brave Dunwallo resting found,His Cuirass, Helm, and Iavelin lying round,And with their spears transfixt him on the ground. His generous soul flew upwards with Disdain,To be massacred, not in Battle slain. Morisso next with clattering swords alarmedWaked with the Noise, but naked and unarmedHis side peirced thro' by Horsa's Javelin, fellEnraged he should his Life, so cheaply sell. Then Offa's spear peirced Capor's Bosome through,His soul to heaven thro the wide Passage flew,Leaving his Body drowned in purple Gore,None served his Prince, or loved his Country more. Edwal a Leader of unblemished Fame,Who from the Banks of fair sabrina cameFell by Morino's spear, and by his sideBrave Adomar, by Balda's Javelin died. Then Meirick in his Breast a fatal WoundReceived, and lay extended on the Ground. Next Catel who excelled in youthful Charms;Was slain by great Romondo's conquering Arms,The glitt'ring steel did thro' his Bowels pass,The Youth expired, and with him Amel's Race. And now what slaughter reigned, what Heaps of dead,What Ruin o'er the blood Camp was spread?Thro' the brown shades at last, they found the wayTo the Pavilion, where King Uter lay. Who soon awakened with the Clamour, rose,And formed his Troops th' Invaders to oppose. Long their unequal Force he did repel,Till peirced by Cerdick's fatal spear, he fell. Urged to retire, Arthur our Prayer withstood,Tho' faint with Labour, Wounds and Loss of Blood:We prest him our remaining Hopes to spare,And not of Albion's Fortune to despair. He does at last to our entreaties yield,And with Reluctant steps forsakes the Field. We thro' the Wood retreated, where the shadeWith Cynthia's Rays, uncertain Twilight made. When the succeeding Day declined, we cameTo Alda's Gates, a Port of ancient Fame. Where we the Night in various sorrows spent,Now Uter, now our Country we Lament. Just Catel's now, now great Dunwallo's Fate,And faithful Edwal's fall, fresh Grief create. While our sad Minds endured so rude a storm,Entring the Room great Gabriel's God-like Form,Mild Glory, and Celestial day diffused,Advanced, he these kind words to Arthur used. Now Albion sinks beneath the saxon weight,so heaven Decrees, 'tis so ordained by Fate. But after ten times the Revolving sun,His Crooked Race, has thro' the Zodiack run,The Clouds dispelled, propitious heaven shall smile,On Uter's House, and this reviving Isle. 
        Octa shall feel just heaven's revenging stroke,And Albion's Youth shall break the saxon Yoke. Mean time, brave Prince, whom universal LoveAttends beneath, and Grace Divine above. To Neustrian Odar's Court with speed repair,Go, Albion's Hopes, and my great Trust and Care. Go, Albion's Hopes with Triumph to return,And Rescue those, that shall your absence mourn. That said, his heavenly Glory he withdrew,And to th' Immortal seats of Happy spirits flew. Now the fair Morn smiles with a Purple Ray,Clearing before the sun the Eastern Way. Whose radiant Train pours from the Gates of Light,And the new Day does to new Toil invite. We the Celestial Message to obey,On a stout ship, that in the Haven layReady to sail, embark and hast away. The sky serene, a fresh and prosperous Gale,sprang from the shore, and swelled out every sail. Albion's white Cliffs and Towers we quickly lost,standing our Course strait to the Neustrian Coast. Where when the sun twice starting from the East,Had ran his Race, and reached the falling West. We safe arrived at fair Cartinia's Port,And took our way from thence to Odar's Court. Odar, a Prince indulgent, valiant, good,Allied to Uter by the Mother's Blood,The barbarous Goths Incursions, then withstood. His beauteous Queen with Joy the Prince received,Her Words our Grief, her Gifts our Wants relieved. Here we to ease our troubled Minds remained,Till Arthur perfect strength and Vigour gained. Then taking leave we straight direct our wayUnto the Camp, where Odar's Forces lay. And as we passed to mitigate our Grief,And to our Woes to give Divine Relief. From his blest Tongue such heavenly Language flows,As did the greatness of his Mind disclose. We thought some God-like Cherub to us spoke,When from his Lips these high Expressions broke. heaven's Offspring with divine Contentment blest,Enjoy the Empire of a guiltless Breast. Tho' spoiled by prosp'rous Robbers, still they find,The large Possessions of a peaceful Mind. Content alone can all their wrongs redress,Content, that other name for Happiness. 
        Free from Desire, they are as free from want,And from the Cares, that envied Greatness haunt. 'Tis equal, if our Fortunes should augment,And stretch themselves to the same vast ExtentWith our Desires, or those Desires abate,shrink, and Contract themselves, to fit our state. Poised on their own unshaken Base they view,All the Vicissitudes, that Time can shew. They, like tall Mountains, are advanced so high,That the low Clouds do all beneath them fly. Hence while loud storm's inferiour seats molest,They undisturbed, enjoy soft Peace and Rest. These Men that suit their wishes to their state,And pleased still with themselves, enjoy their Fate:Whose modest Passions Reason's Nod obey,Are greater Kings, than those who scepters sway. They can the Triumphs of a Court despise,And the rich Toys, that charm deluded Eyes. They rather choose to tame their Thirst, than haveAll the supplies their Feaverish Drought can crave. Desires for Freedom first make humble suit,And modestly demand th' unlawful Fruit. But when set loose, they know not where to stay,But lawless thro' the World's Dominions stray. so subterranean Vapours, that containedIn some close Cavern, are with Ease restrained,When once released, ungovernable grow,And prove fierce storms, that no Resistance know. Th' unhappy Man slave to his wild Desire,By feeding it, foments the raging Fire. His Gains augment his unextinguished Thirst,With Plenty Poor, and with Abundance Curst. 
        But greater Minds, that can themselves subdue,Preserve their Peace, and still their Joys renew. They never by a Vile, or Impious Course,Protect their Wealth, from rising Tempests force. They face the storm, and stand its fiercest shocks;Bold as the Winds, unshaken as the Rocks. No Tempest that invades th' ambitious Breast,Can the calm Region of their Mind molest. so Winds, that Rivulets disturb, will playIn harmless Breezes, on the wider sea. sour Discontent that quarrels with our Fate,May give fresh smart, but not the old abate. Envenomed with its sting each harmless loss,Grows wondrous sharp, and proves a deadly cross. Th' uneasie Passion's disingenious WitThe Ill reveals, but hides the Benefit. 
        It makes a Toy press with prodigious weight,And swells a Molehill, to a Mountain's height. so melancholy Men lie down, and groan,Prest with the burden of themselves alone. Crusht with Phantastick Mountains they despair,Their Heads are grown vast Globes too big to bear. A little spark becomes a raging Flame,And each weak Blast, a storm too fierce to tame. so peevish is the quarrelsome Disease,No prosp'rous Fortune can procure it Ease. Their Breasts are ne'er from inbred Tempests free,Restless as Winds, and troubled as the sea:The Pleasure now they seek would bring Content;But when enjoied, 'twas somewhat else, they meant. some absent Happiness they still pursue,Dislike the present Good, and long for New. The Man now thinks he sees his Bliss, and fliesWith greedy Arms to grasp the gaudy Prize. But then enquiring what his Hopes have won,Vain Man, he finds the cheating shadow gone. Oft does the fair Illusion by him stand,But when pursued gives back, and mocks his hand. sometimes he sees the beck'ning Phantome here,That, when he follows, does elsewhere appear. The Wretch though Tantalized, and always crost,Yet still pursues, though still that Labour's lost. The God-like Arthur with such pious words,Divine Instruction, and Delight affords. And while his Language with a heavenly FlameThus warmed our Breasts, to Odar's Camp we came;Where to the Neustrian King the Prince addrest,Who all the highest signs of Love exprest. The Royal Exile he embraced with Tears,And by these tender words himself endears. King Uter's Fall, your loss, and Albion's Fate,Wound me with Grief too mighty to relate. Long to Misfortunes, and great Wrongs inured,I pity those, that have like Ills endured. You are a stranger here, but not your Name,Your early Worth is told aloud by Fame. Arthur's preserved to be the saxons dread,And Rear opprest Britannia's drooping Head. While you are safe, Britannia must revive,And Uter still in Valiant Arthur live. While you survive, King Octa's Fears remain,And Albion hopes to break her pond'rous Chain. Heroes are for Heroick Deeds designed,And noble Work, attends a noble MindMean time, while here your Choice is to reside,No succours, no supplies shall be denied. And if your Britons banished from their home,Drawn by their Prince's Fame, shall hither come;Briton and Neustrian shall like Treatment find,I'll be to both, without Distinction, kind. And when mild Days shall your Return invite,My Arms shall Aid you, to assert your Right. The Prince replied:Divine Compassion melts your Royal Breast,And makes your Bounty flow on all distrest. Like heaven, you succours to th' Afflicted grant,Comfort their sorrows, and supply their Want. You Crush Oppressors, to th' Opprest are kind,such generous Deeds reveal a God-like Mind. O'er Uter's House the saxon Power prevails,And sad Britannia her dire Fate bewails. The World's supream Director so ordains,Hence in my soul no murmuring Passion reigns. Pleased or Contented still I meet my Fate,Would not be Impious, though Unfortunate. Your generous Offer of Protection here,With such engaging Language, such an Air,As Love and Friendship seek out to Endear;Perswade, that here my Refuge is designed,Till Albion grows more Just, and heaven more Kind. Here your Example shall my Mind prepare,For all the high Concerns of Peace and War. 
        Till Albion call us back, I'll here remain,And in your service shall grow fit to Reign:Here in the Camp the pious Briton staid,To whom the Neustrian Chiefs great Honour paid. For his high Merit could not be concealed,His Valiant Deeds the Hero soon revealed. Loud Fame his God-like Virtues did proclaim,And either Camp resounds with Arthur's Name. He still the Posts of highest Danger sought,And Death and Vict'ry followed, where he fought. When he advanced, the Goths unnumbered swarmsFled from the Terrour of his fatal Arms. Like Love and Wonder, Camp and Court express,That did the Hero, this the saint confess. His sword still won fresh Laurels in the Field,And to his Virtues ev'n Court Vices yield. And 'tis more easie to reduce a Fort,Or win a Battel, then reform a Court. He the fixt Mounds of trembling Europe stood,And still repelled the Goths impetuous Flood. When he appeared, their Men, tho' fierce and bold,Grow Chill with Fear, as when at home with Cold. Thro' the admiring World his Fame was spread,The Christians Joy, and barb'rous Nations Dread. Where gagged with Ice the Waves no longer roar,But with stiff Arms embrace the silent shore. Where naked Hills in frozen Armour stand,Where raging sirius Fries the thirsty Land,And rich Pactolus rolls his golden sand;Thither his Triumphs and Illustrious Name,His generous Deeds, and loud Applauses came. His wondrous Virtues, wondrous Love engage,That reached Perfection, long before his Age. Odar embraced him, as an Angel sentTo guard his Throne, and threatened Fall prevent. He owned his bright Example did support,Th' esteem of Virtue in the Neustrian Court. Their Peace at home proceeded from his Care,And from his Courage their success in War. When we, our hopes of sinking Albion lost,Made by Divine Command the Neustrian Coast,The Gothick Arms that Kingdom had o'errun,surprized their Forts, and fairest Cities won. All Banks born down, so high the Deluge rose,Before King Odar could its Course oppose. 'Twas then the young Deliverer Arthur came,To drive the Goths, and win Immortal Fame. He soon reduced the Cities, and restoredA peaceful Country, to its peaceful Lord. Mean time the British Knights opprest at home,Drawn by his Fame, to find a Leader come. so thick they Land, our Troops were numerous grown,And Arthur led an Army of his own. Ten times the sun had passed his oblique way,By turns contracting, and increasing Day,Darting to either Pole a warmer Ray. And now the British Lords, who though opprestThe Western Region of their Isle possest. Whither retreating they remained secure,And from their Hills defied the saxon Power;Encouraged by his war-like Fame, inviteThe Valiant Arthur to assert his Right. To make a bold Descent upon their Coast,And win the Regions back that Uter lost. Ten chosen Orators were straight dispatcht,The chief whose charming Tongue was never matcht,Was the great Tylon, whose Immortal Worth,Raises to heaven the Isle that gave him Birth. A sacred Man, a venerable Priest,Who never spake, and Admiration mist. Of Good and Kind he the just standard seemed,Dear to the Best, and by the worst esteemed. A generous Love diffused to Humane Kind,Divine Compassion, Mercy unconfined,still reigned Triumphant in his God-like Mind?
        Greatness and Modesty their Wars compose,Between them here a perfect Friendship grows. His Wit, his Judgment, Learning, equal rise,Divinely humble, yet Divinely Wise. He seemed Express on heaven's high Errand sent,As Moses Meek, as Aaron Eloquent. Nectar Divine flows from his heavenly Tongue,And on his Lips charming Perswasion hung. When he the sacred Oracles revealed,Our ravished souls in blest Enchantments held,seemed lost in Transports of Immortal Bliss,No simple Man could ever speak like this. Armed with Celestial Fire his sacred DartsGlide thro' our Breasts, and melt our yielding Hearts. 
        so southern Breezes, and the spring's mild Ray,Unbind the Glebe, and thaw the Frozen Clay. He triumphed o'er our souls, and at his WillBid this touched Passion rise, and that be still. Wolves, Tygers, grisly Lyons did admire,As Poets feign, Orpheus's melodious Lyre. Charmed with sweet Tylon's Voice, a Kind more wild,More fierce and savage, grow divinely Mild. Lord of our Passions he with wondrous Art,Can strike the secret movements of our Heart;Release our souls, and make them soar above,Winged with Divine Desires, and Flames of heavenly Love. 
        He still conveied sublime, seraphick sense,In unaffected strains of Eloquence. 
        Easie and wonderful is all he says,Does both Delight, and Admiration raise. His pious soul did in sad Accents mournBritannia's Chains, and Pagan Gods return. But hoped, kind heaven would free, by Arthur's handOf Barb'rous Laws, and Gods, th' afflicted Land. With the great Tylon young Pollandor went,Famed for his Valour, and of high Descent. With these wise Galbut and Mordennan joyn,Whose Virtues vye with their Illustrious Line. Valiant Giralden worn with War and Age,Does in th' Important Embassy engage. Gisan was added, a Dobunian Knight,Bold in the senate, and as Brave in Fight. Hobar, Mansellan, Cadel, Milo, skilledIn Arms and Eloquence, the number filled. such Orators they chose, fit to exciteThe Pious Arthur, and his Arms invite. Thus Tylon to the pious Prince addrest,And found the passage open to his Breast. Britannia crushed beneath the saxon Yoke,Does with her mournful Prayer your Arms invoke. Enslaved by Forraign Power, Distrest, Undone,she sues for Aid to you, her Valiant son,And hopes for succour from your sword alone. Octa all Right, and ancient Law subverts,And uncontrouled Tyrannick Power asserts. His Lawless Will grasps Arbitrary sway,And British slaves, without Reserve, Obey. The sacred Bounds and Lines, which Right and Law
        Round all those just and happy Kingdoms draw;Which from the Wast of Tyranny they gain,Where Uproar, Rage, and wild Confusion reign,These broken down, Octa does open lay,And throw the goodly Island up a PreyTo Furies, that in lawless Kingdoms stray. Britannia by the Conquerour ravished first,Then giv'n to Priests, and soldiers raging Lust;Wretched Britannia, sunk in deep Despair,Beats her white Breasts, and tears her golden Hair. Dying with Anger, shame and Grief, she lies,And Floods of Tears gush from her beauteous Eyes. Which swell the silver Tide of mournful Thames,
        And grieve old Ocean with the troubled srreams. Hear, pious Prince, how to the Neustrian shore,Complaining Waves roll the sad Treasure o'er. How murmuring Winds wast o'er Britannia's sighs,Can Arthur disregard his Countries Cries?With words like these, and such a moving ArtAs can't be told, he touched the Prince's Heart. With so much Life, he spake sad Albion's Moans,We thought we felt her smart, and heard her Groans. Nor did the pious Prince their Prayer oppose,But soon resolved to ease Britannia's Woes. To Odar he revealed his high Intent,Who ships, and Men, and Arms rejoycing lent:supplying all things our Descent required,And heaping Gifts, more than our selves desired. Our ships prepared, with chearful Zeal and Care,We went on Board, and soon embarked the War. Our Anchors weighed, and Topsails loosed a Galesprang up, and swelled the Womb of every sail. Old Ocean pleased our bounding Vessels laves,That with sharp Keels cut thro' the foaming Waves. Th' astonished saxons see, and fear from far,The long succession of the sailing War. They spread thro' all the Isle the loud Alarm,And trembling Octa hasts his Men to Arm. We sailed not long before the sea ran high,And gathering Clouds deformed the lowring sky. The fearful storm arose, wherein we lostTh' extinguished Day, and on the Billows tost,We drove, till forced upon th' Armoric Coast. He ceased, and now the shades of wearing Night,Did the pleased Audience to their Rest invite. "
"9","Prince Arthur. BOOK V. LOvely Aurora makes a mild EssayWith glimm'ring Dawn, to introduce the Day:Her rosie steps the sun pursues, and spreadsHis smiling Glories on the Mountains Heads. The Princes rose, and Hoel thus exprestHis friendly Passion, to his Royal Guest. Your Virtues shew you are by heaven designedA great Deliv'rer of opprest Mankind. You give to Realms with Wars molested, Peace,And from their Chains tormented slaves release. Fair Liberty's and blest Religion's CauseReviving Hopes from your Protection draws. Your prosp'rous Arms invading Plagues repel,And monstrous Gods, and monstrous Tyrants quell. King Odar's Realm and mine you save, in hisYou settle Peace, and Truth divine in this. And now compassion arms your valiant HandTo free from barbarous Rage, your native Land. To vanquish Pagan Darkness, and displayImmortal Light, and pure Etherial Day. My self will here abide, and succours lendO'er all the Realm Christ's Empire to extend. Conan my son shall on your Triumphs wait,And when returned, your glorious Deeds relate. I'll now command that with incessant Care,My Men assist, your Losses to repair. Then I'll conduct you to the Druids Grove,Which Men of heavenly Contemplation love. Where solemn Walks and awful shade inviteComposed Devotion, and Divine Delight,Exclude the sun's, to let in purer Light. There with your pious Conversation blest,New Light will fill my Mind, new Joy my Breast. The Orders giv'n the Navy's Wants required
        The Princes to the Druids Grove retired. Where Arthur's Language did the King inspire,With holy Transports, and seraphick Fire. Mean time th' Armoricans and Britons meet,All Zealous to Equip the shattered Fleet. Part to the Groves and woody Hills repair,And with loud Labour fill the ecchoing Air. Axes high raised by brawny Arms descendWith mighty sway, and make the Forrest bend. The Mountains murmur, and the nodding Oakes,
        Groan with their Wounds, from thick redoubled strokes. The falling Trees desert the neighbouring sky,Where now the Clouds may unmolested fly. A shady Harvest lies disperst around,And lofty Ruin loads th' encumbered Ground. Part, the hewn Trees draw down with wondrous Toil,T' enrich the Ocean with the Mountains spoil. so fast they came, and in such Order stood,As Orpheus Lyre had called th' obsequious WoodFrom their fixt seats to dance upon the Flood. Part raise the Masts, now to be shaken moreWith furious Winds, then on their Hills before. Part shape new Ribs, and with industrious Care,ships broken Backs, and ghastly Wounds repair. Part their bruised sides anoint with unctious Pitch,Part the carved sterns, with Paint and Gold enrich. Part Cables twist, part smeared with smoak and sweat,With vast Cyclopian strokes huge Anchors beat. While thus the Britons did their ships repair,Th' Infernal Prince enraged and wreckt with Care,swift, as exploded Lightning from the skies,A second time to Lapland Mountains flies. Where the rough Monarch's noisy Palace stands,Whose awful Nod, the raging Winds commands. To him thus Lucifer, kind Prince, to youA second time I for Assistance sue. The cursed Prince that by your high CommandYour furious subjects drove on Hoel's Land;Aided by Hoel does his Fleet repair,Ready to Albion to transport the War. Let adverse Winds blow on the troubled Main,Retard their Project, and their ships detain. Till Octa has prepared his warlike Fleet,The proud Invader on the seas to meet. He ceased, the Emperor of the Winds replies,When you shall ask what rebel Power denies. Your Realms you rule with uncontested sway,Your Post is to command, mine to obey. That said, he calls his wandring subjects home,Eurus and Notus straight obedient come. Last sluggish Auster to his Den with wetAnd flabby Wings, does heavily retreat,To whom their Prince, let now your Labours cease,Indulge your Wings, be reconciled to Peace. Close in your Darksome Prisons sleeping lie,To gain more Breath to blow, more strength to fly. Then down their howling Throats black sops he threw,Of Poppies and cold Nightshade made, that grewOn the dark Banks, where Lethe's lazy DeepDoes its black stores, and drousie Treasure keep,Rolls its slow Flood, and rocks the nodding Waves asleep. The strong Enchantments quick Admission find,And the wild Rout benumming Fetters bind. They murmur in their sleep, and strive in vainTo spurn away th' unweildy leaden Chain. Then calling Boreas, says, fly Boreas, fly,Blow o'er the Lands and on the Billows lie. Make hast, and to th' Armoric Coast repair,Be thine the spacious Empire of the Air. Unrivalled, unmolested Reign alone,Till all thy Force is spent, and all thy Breath is gone. No Hostile, windy Powers contest thy Reign,And uncontrolled Dominion of the Main. scarce had he ended, when up Boreas springs,And thro' the Air spreads out his furious Wings. He o'er warm Climes diffuses Northern spoils,And the cold Treasures of the frozen Isles. With blustring War he frights old Ocean's Court,Buffets the Waves, and raises storms in sport. In vain th' impatient Britons spread their sails,Loud Boreas keeps them back with adverse Gales. Proud Lucifer urged with his Rage and spight,Back to Britannia takes his airy Flight. To find the saxon Monarch, and inspireHis trembling soul with fresh Infernal Fire. And now the Night does her black Throne ascend,And dusky shades her silent state attend. While pale-faced Cynthia with her starry Train,Dart down their trembling Lustre on the Main. The weary Lab'rers their stiff Limbs repose,And sleep's soft Hand their drowsie Eyelids close. All Rest enjoy, but Octa anxious lay,Wakeful, and longing for returning Day. His dreadful Crimes affright his startled soul,And in his Breast black Tides of Horrour roll. Dire shapes, and staring Ghosts pass threatning by. And streaks of Fire across th' Apartment fly. He hears the shreaks of those his bloody HandHad murdered, or that died by his Command. He hears the Widdows sighs, and Orphans Moans,Himself had made, and tortured Pris'ners Groans. The Grounds of pale Despair he sometimes draws,From Arthur's Valour, and his Righteous Cause. sometimes he fears his injured subjects Rage,Their vengeful Arms against him will engage. Then starts, and thinks he hears Prince Arthur's FleetIs on the Coast, proclaimed in every street. Then Lucifer does Odin's shape assume,And with stern Grace enters King Octa's Room. His vig'rous Limbs had dazling Armour on,And round his Head his polished Helmet shone. His conquering sword hung down with awful Grace,And scars of Honour seamed his manly Face. His warlike Hand griped his Vulcanian shield,With rare Devices pourtraied on the Field. With Martial state he strides along the Room,And shakes at every step his lofty Plume. Advancing to the Bed where Octa lay,He spake, son Octa, from celestial Day,From the blest Groves, and mild, Elysian seats,Thy Father Odin to thy Aid retreats. To ease thy restless Mind of anxious Cares,support thy Hopes, and dissipate thy Fears. stand thou unmoved at Arthur's proud Alarms,Conquest attends thine, and thy saxons Arms. He'll sink beneath the sea's insulting Wave,Or Landing, find on shore a surer Grave. Think on the spoils and Trophies you have born,And spreading Laurels on your Temples worn. Let none that's sprung from my Victorious Race,At Danger shrink, and my great stock debase. Go, hast thy Royal Navy to prepare,Let ships with ships encounter, War with War. 
        On the wide Main th'Invader's Fleet oppose,Better to meet, than here expect your Foes. Go Chase their scattered Navy o'er the Deep,And thus in Peace, thy envied Empire keep. He ceased, and with Majestick Pace retired,And left King Octa with fresh Life inspired. Who with the sun arose, resolved to meetWith all his Naval Power, Prince Arthur's Fleet. He gave Command, the Captains straight resortTo their tall ships, and leave the wanton Court. A forward Zeal the busie sailors shew,some mend old ships, and some Equip the new. With flaming Reeds some their pitched Bellies fry,some hoist the Yards, and Canvas Wings apply. some from its Cradle launch a rocking Hull,some at the Cables strain, and howling pullVast Anchors up, some stores and Arms entomb,And stow with hidden War the ship's dark Womb. The shores around, and all the Oazy soilResound with Clamour, and the sailors Toil. Well Rigged and Manned, the ships from every PortTo their appointed Rendezvous resort. The Rivers disembogue, besides their Flood,Into the seas a lofty, painted Wood. And now the Moon had twice the silver FieldOf her fair Orb, with borrowed Glory filled. since the uneasie Britons had remainedBy adverse Winds, within their Port detained. Boreas that had his Blasts profusely blown,His storms all spent, and bleaky Treasures gone,With tired and flaggy Pinions now retreats,To fetch Recruits from wild Laplandian seats. Auster does next with milder Blasts prevail,And for the Britons blows a prosperous Gale. Now each rough Hero of the Ocean standsOn the high Deck, giving Austere Commands. Prince Arthur to Embark approached the shore,Where the reposing seas no longer Roar. But at his Feet obsequious Billows lay,As Conscious of the Power they must Obey. Then their broad Backs, subsiding they submit,Proud to sustain their future Monarch's Fleet. The lofty ships on rolling Billows bound,The Waves in soft Embraces clinging round. As when the Trojans, in the Mantuan songFrom Africk sands, to Latium sailed along. Old Ocean rose up from his rocky Throne,A Crystal scepter, and a reedy CrownHis Power confest, his dewy Head he reeredAbove the Flood, and smiling on the Waves appeared. New gathered Banks of Quicksands he removed,And kindly thro' the Deep, the Navy shoved. so the calm Ocean seemed with equal care,On its pleased Waves, the British Fleet to bear. Huge, rolling Porpoisses spout seas away,And friendly Dolphins round the squadrons play. The floating Castles dance upon the Tide,And on its foaming Ridge Triumphant ride. In glorious Lines the painted squadrons move,As if the Poets Gods lapsed from above,In gilded Clouds, were dancing on the seasIn Masquerade, with the green Deities. Twice the great Ruler of the Day had hurledHis flaming Orb, around th' enlightened World. When at the early Dawning of the Day,The Navies in each others Prospect lay. The saxon squadrons cover all the Main,And with their Prows divide the liquid Plain,Plying to Windward, Arthur's Men prepareTheir Navy, to receive th' advancing War. Down on their Feet King Octa bravely bore,Whose long-winged Navy strercht, from shore to shore. Both Fleets in Lines of War stood cross the Deep,And ready to Engage, just Order keep. They hoist their bloody Flags on either side,And Death her Jaws does for her Feast provide. Now the shrill Trumpets sprightly Voice, and allThe Harmony of War, to Combate call. The saxon sailors with a hideous Cry,Affright the Deep, and rend the Eachoing sky. The barb'rous Yellings and outrageous soundFrom Rock to Rock, and shore to shore rebound. A furious Fight between the Fleets began,And bold selingbert first Attacks their Van. Now bearded Darts, and fatal Javelins fly,And Balls of Fire hiss throgh th' inlightned sky. Each on his Foe missive Destruction pours,And Death receives, and gives in feathered showers. Thus milder Fate at distance sparing slew,Till to a closer Fight selingbert flew,And on his Foe his massy Grapples threw. Which clenching fast their pond'rous, griping Claws,The rude Embrace, both ships together draws. The saxons flew on Board with furious Arms,And on the Decks appear in numerous swarms. Vogan enraged, did fatal Wounds dispence,With lavish Hand, and made a brave Defence. With Battle-Axes, swords, unweildy Crows,They clear the Decks of the insulting Foes. Beat down with ghastly Wounds, some gaspingly,Others their Arms cast down, for Mercy cry. Into the Waves some their pale Bodies throw,And fly from Death above, to Death below. Down the ships sides Torrents of saxon Blood,With unknown Crimson Dye th' astonished Flood. Upon the Decks, that slaughtered Heaps deform,Enraged selingbert pours a second storm,Which like a summers shower soon disappeared,By Valiant Vogan and his Britons cleared. selingbert thus defeated, boils with Rage,But forced at last, his ship to disengage;He bears away, and quits th' unequal Fight,Providing for his safety, by his Flight. Octa mean time his Men for Fight prepares,And fiercely down, on Arthur's squadron bears. The spacious sides of his high ship consumedWhole Forrests, and whole Mountains spoils entombed. It self a Fleet across the Billows stood,Engrossed the Winds, and pressed the labouring Flood. The lofty, gilded Palace shone from far,Presenting to the Foe a glorious War. Bold Octa, and the Valiant Arthur meet,Which strook a vast Concern thro' either Fleet. On this important Action seemed to waitThe British Hero's, and Britannia's Fate. Both sides with shouts their fatal Weapons fling,And winged with Death thick showers of Arrows sing. Unerring Darts in hissing Tempest fly,And carry swift Destruction thro' the sky. ships rush to Battle with enormous shocks,As Towers with Towers encountered, Rocks with Rocks,so in the Northern seas when storms ariseHigh Rocks of snow, and sailing Hills of IceAgainst each other with a mighty Crash,Driv'n by the Winds, in rude Rencounter dash. The sea afflicted foams, the Waves on high,Tossed by the batt'ring Islands, lave the sky. The Crystal Towers break with a fearful Crack,And on the Billows spread their foaming Wreck. Vast sheets of rocky Ice, and broken Isles,Oppress the lab'ring Ocean with their spoils. On both sides now they call forth all their Rage,Resolved in closer Combat to engage. Then Death and slaughter in sad Triumph reigned,And seas of Blood the slipp'ry Decks distained. some the Pale Dead into the Ocean heave,some in the ships low Caves the wounded leave. Prodigious Numbers fell on either side,Thin on the Decks they looked, but thick upon the Tide. For neither Chief e'er met a greater Foe,Both wondrous skill, and wondrous Courage show. While Vict'ry poising equal Hope and Fear,With doubtful Wings hung hov'ring in the Air. The wise Prince Arthur whilst on shore equips,Their use till then unknown, a sort of ships,That since the Deeds of that Important Day,Among lost Arts in deep Olivion lay. Till Captains that in after Ages lived,The long forgotten stratagem revived. Bitumen, sulphur, and Vulcanian spoils,From lab'ring Mountains, and from unctious soils. Naptha and Pitch with skill and Labour wrought,With hidden stores of Flame the Vessel fraught. Like rolling Clouds where Lightning's seeds remain,Their swelling Wounds a fiery Birth contain. Arthur so strange a ship to Octa sent,With such Infernal Treasures in it pent. Which with its grappling Engines fixt, and fired,The bold Commander to his Friends retired. The Fire with unextinguished Rage, consumes,The subterranean Wealth the ship intombs. Vast sheets of Flame, and Pitchy Clouds arise,And burning Vomit, spouts against the skies. Tempests of Fire th' astonished heavens annoy,Fierce, as those storms, that from their Clouds destroy;As Aetna from its glowing Roots was torn,And by its own wild Hurricanes was bornFrom its old seat, to float upon the Waves,With Vulcan's Magazins, and Cyclop's smoaking Caves. The burning Plague adhered to Octa's side,And the scorcht Ribs the hot Contagion fried. The spreading Mischief's growth no Force restrains,The Plague resisted more severely Reigns. To the tall Masts the raging Flame aspires,And neighbour sits to heaven's contiguous Fires. Octa at last his flaming ship forsakes,And in stout Horsa's Vessel Refuge takes. Here he once more his Royal standard Rears,Where on the Deck undaunted he appears,With chearful Looks dissembling inward Fears. He strives the saxons Courage to excite,To press the Foe, and still maintain the Fight. But strives in vain, assisted by the Wind,The spreading Burnings no Resistance find. Resistless Flames advance with lawless PowerFrom ship to ship, and thro' the Fleet devour. Naked, and half-burnt Hulls with hideous Wreck,Affright the skies, and fry the Ocean's back. scorcht Bodies, broken Masts, and smoaking Beams,Promiscuous Ruin, float along the streams. Deformed Destruction, and wild Horrour rideIn fearful Pomp, upon the Crimson Tyde. At last King Octa, dreading longer stay,Commanding all to follow, tows away;The saxon Captains chearfully obey. But Lucifer enraged at this Defeat,Plots to protect, and cover their Retreat. summoned to his Pavilion, straight repairThe Daemons, that infest th' Inferiour Air. With bloated Fiends, that in dark Caves abide,And o'er the subterranean Damps preside. Last the flow Powers come from their misty Dens,That rule the Marshes, Lakes, and stagnant Fens. To whom their Prince, see, how King Octa towsHis shattered ships, prest by Victorious Foes. Go, and protect him from the fierce Pursuit,And give him time, his Navy to recruit. Let all your Damps, and lazy Fogs arise,And with your sluggish Treasures cloud the skies. Let your thick Mists repel th' unwelcome Light,And o'er the Ocean spread a friendly Night. The humble Powers their haughty Prince obey,some from dark Caverns far remote from Day,From each embowelled Mount, and hollow VaultCrude Exhalations, and raw Vapours brought. some from deep Quagmires, Ponds, and sedgy Moors,Drive the dull Reeks, and shove the haizy stores. To their appointed station all repair,And with their heavy Wings encumber all the Air. The ponderous Night's impenetrable steems,Exclude the sun, and choak his brightest Beams. The hov'ring Clouds the saxon Fleet embrace,And wondrous Darkness stops the Briton's Chase. Octa, Aeneas like, a misty NightAround him cast, escapes the Briton's sight. Now had the sun diffused the early Day,From his bright Orb, and chased the Fogs away. To their known shore the saxon Navy flies,And in their Ports and Rivers safely lies. Arthur, who while the shades prevailed, had lainUnder an easie sail, upon the Main;Discovering that the saxon Fleet was lost,Tacked, and directly stood for Albion's Coast. He sailed not long, before his Joyful MenCould from the Masts, their native Countrey ken. First the Bolerian Promontory rearsHis Head, and as a lofty Wedge appears,That down into the Deep, had from the shore,Run from Danmonian Mines and melted Oar. Here when the Oazy shore by ebbing Tides,Is naked left, around its glitt'ring sides,Pale Tinny Oar, and Copper's brighter Vein,Casts Glimmering Lustre o'er the liquid Plain. Next they discover the aspiring Hills,Whose Precious sides Metallick Treasure fills. In their dark Caves Cyclopian Lab'rers sweat,And their vast Blows the ecchoing Hills repeat. With ghastly Wounds they rend the groaning Earth,And from its Bowels wrest the massy Birth. By racking Engines, and redoubled Blows,she's forced her hidden Riches to disclose. Under wide Caldrons, some whole Forrest pile,And melt in purging Flames the wealthy spoil. some in their hot Aetnean Forges sweat,And glowing Wedges on huge Anvils beat. Their mighty strokes shake all the bellowing ground,The neighb'ring Mountains, and the Vales around,With subterranean Toil and Noise resound. They pass the crooked shore, which Fame of oldEnriched with pond'rous Pearl, and scattered Gold. They view the Rocks with Gems and Treasure blest,In verdant samphire, and Eringo drest. Danmonian Crows leaving the Neighb'ring Hills,In numerous, noisy Flights, their Feet and BillsWith Native Crimson died, o'erspread the sky,And o'er the Fleet in Ominous Circles fly. Not far removed, it's sides a Mountain shows,Where winding shores a spacious Bay enclose. His lofty Head, that flying Clouds invades,From shore to shore the dusky Ocean shades. Long this wild seat, as ancient Fame obtained,A fierce Gigantick Race of Men maintained;Tall as the Hill, on which the Monsters dwelt,Whose groaning sides their striding motion felt:Torn from wild Beasts raw skins, and grisly Hydes,A horrid Dress, adorned their hideous sides. Half roasted swine their savage Jaws devour,That stain their squallid Chins with flowing Gore. In thorny Dens the outstretcht Monsters ly,Half eaten Limbs, and mangled Bodies by. With Rapes and Thefts, and endless Murders cloied,A fearful Plague, the Region they destroied. Weathering the Point with favourable Gales,Along the shore the Conquering Navy sails. Into the rough Hibernian seas they came,That howling Monsters, and dire Gulphs defame. Which to avoid, close to the shore they keep,Where fair sabrina to her Parent Deep,Drawing her silver Train along does glide,Diluting with fresh streams the Briny Tyde. Lovely sabrina that for refluent Tydes,Fair Cities, verdant Meadows, flow'ry sides,For Finned Inhabitants, and pleasant streams,Yields only to her fairer sister Thames. 
        Passing these seas, they view the fertile soil,Tilled by silurian Farmers skilful Toil:Where the vext sea fair Clamorgania laves,And rolls along the sand its foaming Waves. Here Rhemnius gliding by Carphilli's Walls,Proud of its Roman strength, into the Ocean falls. Then Ratostibium from the hilly Lands,Rolls down its rapid Tyde, and troubled sands. Next they descry an isle of wondrous Fame. Which the succeeding Ages Barry name. In its high sides that to the sea appear,Dreadful to tell, th' astonished saylors hearAetnean Labour, where the bellowing Rocksshake with Gigantick Toil, and Thundering strokesOf groaning smiths, sometimes a mighty sledgeOn a vast Anvil, beats a flaming wedge. Now Bellows formed of vast, capacious Hydes,All Boreas blow from their Aeolian sides. Now the resisting Flames and Fiery store,By Winds assaulted, in wide Forges roar,And raging seas flow down of melted Oar. sometimes they hear long Iron Bars removed,And to the sides, huge heaps of Cynders shoved. As we advanced the Coast in Prospect lay,Which the Dimetian Lords did then obey. Here th' opening Land invites with outstretcht Arms,The troubled seas, free from the loud AlarmsOf the rough, windy Powers, to take their Ease,And on its Bosom lye diffused in Peace. The flowing Waters smooth their surrowed Face,And gently roll into the Land's Embrace. To secret Creeks the weary Billows creep,And stretcht on Oazy Beds securely sleep. No happy Land along th' European Coast,Can such a fair and spacious Haven boast. In this wide station, the Dimetians pride,The biggest ships, and greatest Fleets may ride,safe from the Insults of the Winds and Tide. Two lofty Castles with their gilded Towers,Inlighten, and defend the subject shores. Here the Victorious Britons safe arrive,With all the Joy, long-wished for Harbours give. In frequent Throngs the glad Dimetians standUpon the Coast, thick as th' unnumbered sand. Their Acclamations and loud shouts rebound,From trembling Hills, and shake the shores around. The ships lay rocking, and their Masts bend moreWith Britons Breath, than with the Winds before. The joyful Britons and their Friends debark,And near the shore a spacious Camp they mark. The pious Prince at a fair Castle staid,That Malgo the Dimetian Lord obeied. Now her brown Wings the silent Night displaysLight sprinkled o'er with Cynthia's silver Rays. silence and Darkness all to Rest invite,And sleep's soft Chains make fast the Gates of Light. Prince Arthur sleeps, by summons from on high,From trembling Joynts his active spirits flyTo the round Palace of th' Immortal soul,And thro' the Rooms and dark Apartments roll. The busie Crowd fills all the labouring Brain,Bright Fancy's Work-house, where close Cells containOf Forms and Images an endless Train,Which thither thro' the waking senses glide,And in fair Mem'ry's Magazine abide. Composed of these, light scenes and shows appear,That still employ the restless Theater. Divinely moved the Airy Figures takeTheir several Ranks, and this bright Vision make. Prince Arthur on a verdant EminenceConversing with King Uter stood, from whenceHe views with wondring Eyes, great Lords and states,Crowned Heads, Victorious Princes, Potentates,Heros and Heroines, a glorious Train,That in long Order filled the subject Plain. Prince Arthur on the Royal scene intent,Demands what this August Assembly meant. For what end thither come, and who they wereThat at th' Illustrious Congress did appear. King Uter then replied: Know pious son,That after various bloody Battels won,You Beauteous Ethelina shall espouse,The fairest Branch of all King Octa's house. A Christian Princess of a Pagan Line,Whose Virtues equal with her Beauty shine. You shall Triumphant mount the British Throne,Which has not yet, so great a Monarch known. swell not with Pride, th' Imperial seat you gain,Brings envied Honour, but unenvied Pain. Your People rule with equal Laws, and knowYou're happy, when you make your subjects so. Let them a Good, Indulgent Father find,Be mercifully Just, severely Kind. Let your bright Virtues Imitators draw,Glorious Examples have more Force, then Law. seek not an uncontrolled and lawless sway,subjects from Love, but slaves from Fear obey. And whom the People fear, they quickly hate,Which Passions in their Prince the like Create. Hence mutual Jealousies, and deep Designs,Hence strong Distrust the mould'ring state disjoyns. Diffusing good on all Mankind, you'll showYou imitate heaven's Government below. The Benefactor will most Honour bring,And the Deliverer's greater than the King. Believe no Foreign hostile Power can moveYour Throne, supported by your subjects Love. The bright Assembly that surrounds the Hill,And with their Numbers all the Vally fill,Are Albion's Hero's, who in future daysTheir own, and Albion's Name, to heaven shall raise. The Regal Orders that the rest outshineWith glittering Crowns, are the Imperial Line,That after you, on Albion's Throne shall sit,Their Names in Fate's Eternal Volumes writ. The Kings that in the foremost Rank appear,Who frowning and unpleasant Aspects were;Whose waning Crowns with faded Lustre shine,shall after you succeed, first Constantine
        Conanus, and the rest of British Line. These look not with their Native splendour bright,But dimly shine, with delegated Light. Heroick Deeds by great Forefathers done,Cast all their Glory on them, not their own. To narrow Bounds their scanty Empire shrinks,And Britons Grandeur, with their Virtue sinks. At last their Crimes, offended heaven provoke,To Crush their Nation with the saxon Yoke. Here Arthur sighed, that his degenerate Race,should with inglorious Deeds their stock debase. When Uter cried, Observe the saxon Line,Where mighty Kings the British Rank outshine. Crowns on their Heads, and scepters in their Hand,All great in War, and born for high Command. Their Arms the British Empire shall Assail,And aided by the Britons Crimes prevail. This mighty Nation quickly shall believeThe Christians God, and heavenly Light receive. That's Ethelbert the first of saxon Race,That shall pure Faith, and Truth Divine embrace. He shall destroy in their own Temples Flames,Their sensless Gods, of barb'rous, Northern Names. In vain their Priests on helpless Idols call,They, and their Groves by the same Axes fall. Fragments of broken Altars, and the spoilOf ruined Gods, fill all th' applauding Isle. All shall adore the great mysterious King,And of his Cross the glorious Triumphs sing. The spring of Life gilded with heavenly BeamsPurge guilty Minds, with pure Baptismal streams. From hence the Light shall break that shall dispellThe Pagan shades, that on the saxons dwell. Proud Lucifer subdued, flies in despair,With all th' Infernal Powers about the Air,That with their broad, extended Wings retreat,To seek a safe, and unmolested seat:To fix on scythian Hills their gloomy Throne,Or on the sands fried by the burning Zone. 
        As when the storks prepare to change their Clime,The long-necked Nation in the Air sublimeWheeling, and towring up in Circles fly,And with their cackling Cries disturb the sky. In lingring Clouds they hang, and Leisure give,For all their feathered People to arrive. To th' Airy Rendezvous all hast away,And their known Leaders noisy Call obey. Then thro' the heavens their trackless Flight they take,And for new Worlds, their present seats forsake. so here the Fiends assembled in the Air,Quit Albion's soil, and to wild Lands repair. Remark that Prince, that in the midst appears,seven bright imperial Diadems he wears;That's the great Egbert, whose heroick Might,shall the dismembered Island reunite. His Arms shall give him universal sway,And all the saxons shall his Power obey. see there the great Northumberian Monarch stands,Edwine his Name that all the Isle commands. A happy Prince, if his good Angel's ArtDiverts the Mercian Ruffian's bloody Dart. saxons and Britons shall obey his Arms,Himself, the lovely Ethelburga Charms. Her beauteous Eyes the mighty Monarch fireHer Words, his soul with Christian Flames inspire. Blest Ethelburga of unrivaled Worth,That plants Religion in the barren North. see Alfred there, all shall his Praises sing,A pious souldier, and an humble King. Hero and Bard, able in lofty VerseHis own great Deeds, and Triumphs to reherse. Obeied by all his unresisted Arms,shall to their Coasts repel the Danish swarms. Into the seas swept by his potent Hand,Those Northern Locusts leave th' afflicted Land. The People his wife Laws shall cultivate,Form their rude Minds, and smooth th' unpolished state. Upon the Verdant Plain where Isis streamsHast to th' Embraces of her sister Thames. 
        This mighty Prince shall a famed Empire Found,Where Learning sits with branching Laurels Crowned. Where sacred Arts with all their Lettered Train,In lofty schools shall unmolested Reign. Banished from Greece and Rome, no safe RetreatThey'll find, till setled in this Peaceful seat. Ages to come, this seat will Oxford name,Of which no Time, or Place, shall bound the Fame. Remotest Nations shall her Wonders know,Far as Great Britain's potent Navies go. Learning, her Native growth shall strangers fetch,And taught by her, their own rude Countries teach. Th' admiring World shall Albion then adore,Revere her Armies, but her Learning more. As when the Wisdom of th' Eternal Mind,Rude Chaos laboured, and the Mass refined;The scattered Rays that wandered in the Air,Did to the sun's capacious Orb repair;The shining Colonies poured thick aroundHere fixt, and did a glorious Empire Found. so here the broken Beams of glimmering Arts,Assembling all their Light from distant parts,To make bright Oxford's Luminary stay,That o'er the World shall spread Celestial Day. Remark Elfeda there, a Martial Dame,That by her Arms shall win Immortal Fame. At last the Princes of the saxon Line,From heavenly Love and Purity decline. Their Christian Virtues, and pure Zeal abate,And with them sickens their decaying state. With Christian Names, their Pagan Crimes they keep,And deaf to heaven's loud Threats securely sleep. Till the fierce Dane sent by supream Command,A vengeful scourge does on their Borders Land. The saxon's Guardian Angels called away,Leave them to hostile Arms, an easie Prey. Thus heaven afflicts a Land, when Impious grown,And from their Throne pulls haughty Monarchs down. This dreadful Curse, shall by relenting heaven,Be soon from sad Britannia's Empire driv'n. The Cruel, slothful Dane shall soon decline,To make way for a nobler Norman Line. That Prince observe, that moves with so much Grace,Is the great William of the Norman Race. A mighty Prince, a Leader Brave, and Wise,Whose towring Fame shall soar above the skies. heaven does for him Britannia's Crown design,From which great stock shall branch a numerous LineOf mighty Princes, that shall Rule this Isle,Enriching it with Conquered Nations spoil. The Valiant second Henry, see him there,What Majesty does in his Looks appear?Through wild Hibernia he shall force his way,And add four Kingdoms to the British sway. Brave Richard see, who from the sacred Coast,shall drive the Barb'rous, Unbelieving Host. In Gaul this Monarch's Arms shall be renowned,Dreaded in Battel, and with Conquest Crowned,Long time in Peace his Crown might be enjoied. Could he the Arrow at Chaluz, avoid. Now, son, your Eye to that brave Warriour turn,Whose Beams so much the Norman Line adorn. How great a Presence, what a Port he bears?How much a mighty Conq'rour he appears?That Prince is Edward, whose Victorious ArmsIudea save from Pagan Foes Alarms. How he returns thro' the Trinacrian Isle,Thro' high Parthenope's delicious soil,Thro' loud Applauses of admiring Rome,
        Reeking in hostile Blood triumphant home!The beauteous Person next that Monarch seen,Is Eleonora his Illustrious Queen. In storms she's with him on the Ocean tost,To seek out horrid War on Asia's Coast. Midst barbarous Arms his Wife, Adviser, Friend,she his prodigious Labours shall attend. And when her Lord, so heaven permits, shall feelWithin his Veins, the Murd'rer's poisoned steel. she to the spreading Plague her Lips applies,And gives that Ease, which Asia's Balm denies. Invading Death her healing Kisses charm,And with new Life the sinking Monarch warm. No other Prince that in this Age shall reign,shall equal Honour to brave Edward's Gain,But great Adolphus of th' Illustrious RaceOf Heros, which the House of Nassau Grace. This mighty Prince shall gain th' Imperial sway,And wide Germania shall his Laws obey. The God-like Virtues, and Heroick Fire,That shall the brave Nassovian House inspire,shall make Adolphus shine in this high sphear,Preluding to the great DelivererThe pious William; yonder he's in sight,In whom Nassovian Blood, and ours unite. There war-like Edward stands, that with his Host,shall cross the Ocean to the Gallick Coast. Where he his Conquering Ensigns shall display,And make the haughty Franks his Laws obey. There Queen Philippa shines, th' Albanians Dread,Worthy of Britain's Crown, and Edward's Bed. While Forraign Kingdoms Edward's Arms subdue;Hers thro' the North the vanquished seats pursue. see the Black Prince in Armour by her side,Proud Gallia's Terrour, and fair Albion's Pride. What Triumphs wait him in Pictavian Fields?What never-fading Laurels Croissy yields?That Henry mark, the glorious Conquerour,That Gallia shall reduce by Albion's Power. Immortal Prince, if Arms can make thee so,For thee in Norman Fields what Laurels grow?How great he'll seem his Arms distained with Blood,Chasing the Franks o'er sein's affrighted Flood. At Agencourt what Wonders shall be done,What Towns of Force, what Battels shall be won,Before in Triumph he ascends their Throne?Our Blood the Royal Channel now regains,Derived thro' Tudor our brave Offspring's Veins;Which with the Norman joyned, the Confluent TideAs long, as that of Time, shall downward glide. From their Embrace to rule Britannia springs,A glorious Race of Queens, and potent Kings. see, the first Tudor that ascends the Throne,After the glorious Field at Bosworth won. The scepter he shall sway with great Applause,And Rule the Isle with Wise and Equal Laws. Young Edward there, Albion's Delight appearsLearned, Pious, Manly Wise above his years. Then Liberty in all her lovely Charms,shall sit secure from Tyranny's Alarms. Religion purged from Rome's Adulterous stain,shall in her pure, and Native splendor Reign. No greater Mind to Albion's Crown succeeds,Revered for Brave, and loved for Pious Deeds. Blest Albion, if kind heaven would long permitso great a Monarch, on thy Throne to sit. But, oh, how short Delights attend him here,such heavenly Guests are shown, and disappear. Dear both to Earth and heaven, he'll soon removeHis Throne from hence, to Reign in Bliss above. With what Complaints, with what despairing Cries,shall sad Britannia Mourn his Obsequies?There, see, the bright Elizabetha rise,Inlightning with her Rays the British skies. Th' Indulgent Parent of her People, sheLoves, Feeds, and Guards Britannia's Family. heaven's and her People's Rights she shall protect,And for Britannia's Ease, her own neglect. Her sons she shall embrace with pious Care,And from her Coasts send back th' Iberian War. Blest times, when she that wears th' Imperial Crown,Regards her Peoples safety, as her own. Intently now on that great Monarch gaze,so much distinguished by his brighter Rays. This is the Man, the brave Nassovian, whomI named, the great Deliverer to come. succeeding Prophets under your great Name,This our great Offspring shall aloud proclaim;Raised from a noble Branch of Tudor's Line,From Thamisis transplanted to the Rhine. 
        Amazed Posterity, will scarce believeThe wond'rous Deeds this Hero shall atchieve. The European World by Rome and Gaul opprest,By his long-wished-for Arms shall be releast. He'll far outshine his own Heroick Race,Europe's Protectors, who shall Tyrants chase,And Monsters vanquish with Herculean Toil,And rescue from their bloody Jaws, their spoil. The beardless Hero's first victorious Arms,shall free his Country from the Gauls Alarms. As he advances, seas of Gallick Bloodshall with red streams swell Mosa's wondring Flood. Their slaughtered Ranks shall lie along the Rhine,
        And with strange Purple stain th' astonished Vine. For in this AgeJust heaven shall cause a haughty Prince to rise,Cruel, as Lucifer, and like him wise. heaven's Laws, and Power, the Tyrant shall deride,Breaking in sport, the Oaths wherewith he's tide. Th' insatiate Monster pleased with humane Gore,And urged with Hellish Rage, shall first devourHis Gallick slaves, and with a merc'less Hand,spread fearful Ruin o'er his fruitful Land. Raging with Fire and sword he shall invadeHis Neighbour's Cities, to his Gold betraied. No spoil, no Carnage, shall his Fury cloy,But drunk with Blood, he shall around destroy,Like spreading Fires, or Torrents roaring down,From melting snows, that all the Vally drown. Like Hell, he shall derive his chiefest Joy,From the divine Permission to destroy. Mischief and Ruin, he shall Conquest name,And from Destruction raise a dismal Fame. Regions laid wast, Orphans and Widdows Cries,Proclaim his Power, and barb'rous Victories. so dire a Plague, shall heaven permit to reign,To scourge the impious World, but to restrainThe savage spoiler, shall this Prince employ;Monsters grow up, for Heros to destroy. The valiant Youth sinking Batavia saves,Their surest Digue against the Gallick Waves. After opprest Britannia shall invite,The famed Deliverer to assert her Right. His Arms the lowring Tempest shall dispel,That threatning Albion, rolls from Rome and Hell. Fair Liberty her drooping Head shall rear,And blest Religion on her Throne appear. His Reign fresh Life to Albion shall impart,And teach her sons War's long-forgotten Art. Britons dissolved in soft, inglorious Ease,In courtly Vices, and luxurious Peace,He shall inspire with a new martial Flame,And lead them on, to gain their Ancient Fame. Now Albion's Youth polish their rusty Arms,And once more, Gallia dreads their loud Alarms. Victorious Britons, as of old, shall comeLaden with spoils, and crowned with Laurels, home. He ceased; but near the great Nassovian stoodA Heroine, by mien of Royal Blood. Her Form Divine, and seraph-like her FaceWhere heavenly sweetness, strove with Princely Grace. But a black Cloud on her fair Temples lies,And on the ground she fixt her beauteous Eyes. Prince Arthur on th' Illustrious Form Intent,Asked who she was, and what the sadness meant,That her dejected Eyes did overspread,What the thick Mist that hovered round her Head. King Uter with Reluctance thus replies,While flowing Tears gushed from his mournful Eyes,Ah, son, demand no more their Fates to know,That must produce such universal Woe. Telling that Offspring's story, I revealA scene of Grief, I laboured to conceal. This Wonder to the World, as soon as shown,Is taken up to her Celestial Throne. Ah! what sad Accents, what a mournful Cry,What lamentable sounds will fill the sky,When her high Herse shall from her Palace goThro' weeping Throngs, in all the Pomp of Woe. so sad a Cry did wondring Nile affright,When Egypt's first-born Youth were slain by Night. What strains of sorrow will Augusta show?What Floods of Tears, sad Thamisis, will flowInto thy stream, while gliding by the Dome,Where fresh erected stands her lofty Tomb. son, mind her Presence, what a God-like Air?What Throngs of Graces in her Eyes appear?No nobler Genius, no well fashioned MindE'er took a Turn more happily designed,From an Etherial Mould more laboured and refined. Mild as the blest above, without sereneAs Eden's Air, and calm as heaven within. No lovelyer star adorns the British sphear,Ah! might she longer in her Orb appear,That her Celestial Influence might FlowIn chearing streams on all the Isle below!New warmth to Albion her kind Beams afford,To Albion guarded, as before restored,By the Nassovian Angel's flaming sword. My fairest Offspring! ah, her rigid Doom!she shall Maria be: Come, quickly come,Bring me white Lillies, Roses newly blown,Lillies and Roses, like Maria's own. These on her Herse I'll scatter, and perfumeWith od'rous Herbs and Flowers the precious Tomb. Let me my sorrow thus express, 'tis true,A fruitless Deed, but all that Love can do. The Tides of Grief that here swelled Arthur's Breast,Broke sleeps soft Fetters, and dissolved his Rest. The Airy Objects, that without did wait,Now rush in by the senses open Gate. His waking Thought, the wondrous scene reviews,And various Passions in his Mind renews. "
"10","Prince Arthur. BOOK VI. NOw in the East the saffron Morn arose,And called the Lab'rer from his soft repose. Thro' all the Region flew Loquacious Fame;And the glad tydings spread, where'er she came. Prince Arthur's Landed, is the general Cry,straight to their Arms the chearful Britons fly. The great Restorer all prepare to meet,And warlike Noise resounds in every street. His eager Friends impatient of delay,Had long expected this Auspicious Day. They knew he was Embarked to bring them Aid,And for his quick, and safe Arrival praied. Oft on the Rocks and highest Hills they stood,And all around the subject Ocean viewedWith longing Eyes, hoping the sight to gainOf Arthur's Conquering Navy on the Main. And when no Fleet, no Arthur they descried,They chid the Winds, and interposing Tyde. With less impatience staid th' Ithacian Dame,Till to her Arms her wished Ulysses came. The sestian Maid not with such Passion stood,To spy her Lover cutting thro' the Flood. The Zealous Men while adverse Boreas reigned,And from the Coasts Prince Arthur's Fleet detained,When mild Aurora with her rosy Light,Began to streak the dusky Face of Night,Oft from their Beds, up to the Windows flew,And thence the Fanes and flying Clouds would view,To see if yet more favourable GalesRose from the south, to swell Prince Arthur's sails. Anxious they look around, but when they findTheir hopes retarded by an adverse Wind,Their sorrow in repeated sighs exprest,They to their Beds return, but not to Rest. Thus they expected Arthur's powerful Aid,And such their sorrow was, their Hopes delaied. But now, at last the Prince's Fleet arrived,Raises their Courage, and their Hopes revived. The joyful Throngs Prince Arthur's Praise proclaim,This every Tongue employs, ev'n Children aim,That scarce have learned to speak, to lisp his Name. some praise his stature, and his God-like Face,His awful Presence, and Majestick Grace,His Courage some, and Conduct in the Field,And think great Caesar's Fame to his, must yield. His Clemency and Pity some admire,And all the Virtues, that his Mind inspire. The Actions of his Childhood some repeat,In which they still discovered something Great. And now, what they expected he appears,The Hero promised in his tender years. Others relate the ancient Prophecies,Wherein was told a Monarch should ariseOf mighty Power, and Universal Fame,That should to heaven advance the British Name. Things weighed, and well compared, they all consentArthur's the Conq'rour, that the Prophets meant. some tell their Friends, their Courage to support,What mighty Guards surround the Prince's Court. What succours hired were from Germania brought,succours, as oft Victorious, as they fought. Fierce Alpine Allobrogs with slaughter fed,In snows and everlasting Winter bred. Men of stupendous Bulk, pampered and cloiedWith Blood of Nations, which their Arms destroied. Armed with broad, flaming swords, and mighty spears;Their Caps were Wolves, their Coats rough skins of Bears. Who stretcht on Beds did n'er their Limbs repose,But from the naked ground still vig'rous rose. Of Aspect terrible, their squallid FaceThick, matted Beards with bristly Terrour grace. None e'er escaped, that did their Arms provoke,They Mow whole squadrons with a single stroke. This monstrous Kind of Men did Fame invent,And Arthur's Troops so dreadful represent,To raise the Britons Hearts before deprest,And strike a Terrour thro' the saxon's Breast. With Joy transported all for Arms declare,And all the Accoutrements of War prepare. The shepherds on the Hills forsake their Flocks,And leave their brouzing Goats upon the Rocks. Instead of Crooks, that did their Flocks command,Long warlike spears they brandish in their Hand. The British Youth their Courage raised, rejoyceTo see the Banners fly, and hear the Trumpet's Voice. The Farmers leave the Hopes their Field afford,To reap fresh Laurels with their Conquering sword. The noise of War does from the Hills rebound,And midst the Miners Eccho's under ground. Who straight alarmed, at nobler Labour sweat,And into swords their glowing Metal beat. Their Forges, Anvils and wide Bellows breath,Are all emploied in various kinds of Death. some shape the Halbert, and broad Fauchion's Blade,And Darts by some, and Arrows Heads are made. some forming Battle-Axes heave the sledge,some into shields strike out a flaming Wedge. To fashion Helmets some the Hammer ply,some labour, Pieces for the Leg and Thigh. With Lances armed, some their hot Coursers rein,And to the War Curvet along the Plain. some with their clenching Gauntlets grasp the shield,shake their long spears, and rush into the Field. Across their shoulders some their Quivers hung,Their Arrows trimed, and Bows for Death new strung. As when black Clouds dark'ning the summer sky,Loaded with Crystal Tempests slowly fly,Th' Artillery discharged with mighty soundTh' exploded Hailstones, leap upon the ground,Thunder amidst the Woods, and from the Hills rebound. so with the Britons all the Region swarms,so thick their Troops, so loud the noise of Arms. The groaning Earth complains, and trembling feelsThe trampling Hoofs, and Chariots fervid Wheels. In order now, Celestial Muse, declareWhat Troops, and who those ancient Britons were,Who for their Country's Liberty combined,And their Brigades with Arthur's Forces joyned. From Time's dark Prisons set the Hero's free,And may their glorious Names Immortal be,First warlike Cadwall the Dimetians Head,His Forces from the neighbouring Region led. Their Troops advance from the bleak Northern shore,On which the Hybernian sea's loud Billows roar. And where Octopitarum thro' the WavesWedging his Way, the opposing Ocean braves. Fair Maridunum pours her squadrons forth,Where the famed sorc'rer Merlin had his Birth. They came who dwelt round high Plinlimmon's sides,Where stuccia flows, and swift Turobius glides. King Meridoe the Oordovican leadsDown from the British Alps, whose snowy HeadsImaus like, stand towring in the Air,And midst the stars eternal Winter bear. And from the soil laved by Conovius Flood,And Menai's Banks, where then segontium stood. Great Numbers swarmed from Mona's noble Isle,Deformed for Aspect, but of fertile soil. Where once in shady Groves erected stood,The Druids Altars stained with humane Blood. The Troops their March from Mediolanum take,From Helen's Way, and the Tegeian Lake. Thro' which fair Deva's streams so swiftly pass,They uncorrupted shun th' impure Embrace. Here the sublime Mervinian Mountains rise,And with sharp-pointed Tops transfix the skies. Next Morogan the bold, silures brought,None for their Country's Freedom better fought. They bravely Valens and his Troops withstood,And died sabrina's streams with Roman Blood. With like success Veranius they defeat,And forced his vanquished Eagles to retreat. This cause, as much their Courage did provoke,To free their Country from the saxon Yoke. They take in hast their swords and Bucklers down,And march to meet the Prince from every Town. From all the Cities on the verdant sideOf Nidus, and on Loghor's Crystal Tyde. They march from Bovium, and the neighboring shore,Thick, as the Waves, that there insulting roar. Down from the Hilly Lands the Britons came,Which now th' Inhabitants Brechinia name. Where the black Mount stands lofty in the Air,And forky Peak, since called great Arthur's Chair. They march from Bulleum, Haga, and the Lake,Where when broad sheets of Ice dissolving crack,The ratling Noise rebounds from Neighb'ring Hills,And with loud Thunder all the Region fills. From Ariconium, and the flowry space,VVhich wanton Vaga's winding Arms embrace. Where Lugus his transparent Bosom spreads,And where Liddenus murmurs thro' the Meads. Where thick Hesperian Woods with Apples crowned,Of golden Hue, enrich the Fields around. Which the most generous British Wine produce,Ausonia scarce affords a nobler Juice. They leave the Fields famed for the purest Corn,And the rich Plains that Wooly Flocks adorn,Which bless the Farmer with a nobler Fleece,Than what Apulia boasts, or fertile Greece. 
        They leave the golden Vale, and happy GroundWhich Dorus laves, and lofty Woods surround,The warlike Youth from Venta came and thoseThat Muno's Flood and Isca's streams inclose. With those that round the Oazy Moor are bred,And near the Golden Rocks refulgent Head. Out from her Gates her Youth fair Isca pours. Crowned with gilt spires, rich Domes, and lofty Towers. Where Golden Roofs, and checkered Floors abound,Deep Vaults, and spacious Chambers under ground. A stately Theater the Town o'erlooks,And noble Works convey the neighb'ring Brooks,By Conquering Romans built, that far from homeThey might enjoy the sports and Pomp of Rome. 
        such was the ample City's ancient Fame,Now worn by time it scarce preserves its Name. Those from Gobanium march, a Town that stoodOn Isca's and Gevini's confluent Flood. In cheerful Troops the stout Cornavians came,From the rich soil we now salopia name. From either side of fair sabrina's Tyde,Whose silver streams the fruitful Land divide. From Usocona, end the Towns that layOn the famed Roman Military way. From Uriconium, yet a Noble Town,And old Rutunium, then of good Renown. Galbut their Leader at their Head appearsA lovely Youth, and Wise above his Years:Descended from a Noble ancient RaceOf Heros, who the British Annals grace. He by Forefathers Beams Illustrious shone,Great by their Deeds, but greater by his own. Zeal for his Country, and the British Cause,The generous Youth to glorious Danger draws. For this he crost the Ocean, to implorePrince Arthur's Arms, their Freedom to restore. The Prince embraced him, as his Fav'rite Friend,And did his Zeal and Vigilance commend. He staid the dear Companion of his Toil,Both on the seas, and on th' Armorick soil. And when the saxon, and the British Fleet,(A dreadful day) did on the Ocean meet,By Arthur's side upon the Deck, he stoodDistained with scattered Brains, and reeking Blood. The Youth at danger unconcerned appeared,And nothing but his Country's suff'rings feared. He leaped out first on the Dimetian strand,And welcomed Arthur to his Native Land. Where taking leave, he to his Country came,To Head his Men, and win yet greater Fame. Devana sends brave Troops, a noble Town,For lofty Works, and splendid structures known. Where once the Roman Conquerours did reside,And envied not Italia's Wealth and Pride. The bold Inhabitants on Deva's Bank,And they who Danus, and Merseia drank;With those that had their seats, along the soilWhich Briny Riches gives with easie Toil;Draw out and Muster on the Neighb'ring Plain,Resolved the British Honour to regain. Bothan their Captain was a Warlike Knight,A brave Asserter of his Country's Right. A noble, but ungovernable Fire,(such is the Hero's) did his Breast inspire. His honest Rage, his Friends could scarcely Rule,Hot for the Camp, but not for Counsel Cool. Fit to assist to pull a Tyrant down,But not to please the Prince that mounts the Throne. Impatient of Oppression, still he stoodHis Country's Mounds, against th' invading Flood. Impetuous, as a Tempest in its Course,He not to Conduct trusted, but to Force. Unskilled in Court Intreagues, on which the wiseAnd crafty statesman, as his strength, relies;He still expected that a loud Applause,should follow Brav'ry, and a Righteous Cause,His Country praised him; no Britannick Lord,Was as his People's Patron more adored. And Now in Arms they throng about their Head,None to the Prince such numerous Forces led. The Coritanians, that the soil possest,By fair Darventio's fruitful Waters blest,And Repandunum, where clear Trenta's TideDo's into Dovo's silver Bosome glide. Those near high Peak, in heavenly Waters drowned,And in the Dale, which craggy Rocks surround;Their Zeal and Courage raised by loud Alarms,Forsook their seats, and Fields, and flew to Arms. These valiant Men that Fame and Freedom sought,To join the Prince's Arms Canvallo brought. Noble Canvallo, who did with him bringThe Majesty, and Presence of a King. Of lofty stature, and a graceful Air,By's own sex feared, and favoured by the Fair. Th' Inglorious Pleasures of the wanton Court,That drained his Wealth, did not the Patriot hurt,Fit for the Camp, or Business of the state,But soft Enjoyments Love to both abate. Alarmed with Publick Danger, he aroseLike a roused Lyon, from his long Repose. Armed, and equiped with gaeat Magnificence,He mounts his fiery Turk, bought at a vast Expence. His princely Train, and splendid Equipage,Wher'ere he past the Eyes of all engaged. The Atrebatians From the happy Land,Which then sublime Gallena did command. Where winding Thamisis does bless the soil,The Wealth and Glory of the British Isle. In War-like Bands advance to Arthur's Aid,And rich Bertudor, as their Head obeied,Who still against the Pagan Interest strove,Rich in Possessions, and his People's Love. His happy Tenants, and the Farmers round,His Hospitable House still open found. Each Week ten Oxen from the stall he drew,A hundred sheep, and forty swine he slew;Fat Venison, Fowl, and Fish, an endless store,To feed his Guests, his servants, and the Poor. He to the Woods, and Forrests was inclined,To hunt the Fox, and chase the flying Hind. Pleased with his Friends, and with his rural sport,He wisely shuned, the Dangers of the Court. But for the Christian Cause, and publick Peace,He quits the Forrests, and his Wealth and Ease. His Helmet braced, and on his Arm his shield,He marched before his Troops into the Field. And that my Verse may to his Name be just,Of all the Lords Bertudor was the first,That to the Camp, his valiant Forces brought,Tho' not inured to War, and tho' remote. The Durotriges from the western Coast,Where the Britannick Ocean's Waves are tost. Their Troops assembled, for the Prince declare,And march from all the Towns, to meet the War. From Dornavaria, and the seats that standOn Froma's stream, and wealthy Blackmoor Land:From Vendogladia, and the Tow'rs that roseOn the fat Glebe, where pleasant stourus flows. sakil their Leader, an Illustrious Peer,Was to his Prince, and to his Country dear. He their Maecenas cheers the British Bards,
        Learns them to sing, and then their songs rewards. so heaven to makes Men good, does Grace bestow,And then rewards them for their being so. Him as their Head the Athenian sons adore,The Muses Fav'rite, but the People's more. To form great Men, his Palace was the school,His Life good Breeding's, and good Nature's Rule. To him the needy Men of Wit resort,And find a Friend in an unlettered Court. The Poets Nation, did Obsequious waitFor the kind Dole, divided at his Gate. Laurus amidst the meagre Crowd appeared,An old, revolted, unbelieving Bard,Who thronged, and shoved, and prest, and would be heard. Distinguished by his louder craving Tone,so well to all the Muses Patrons known,He did the Voice of modest Poets drown. sakil's high Roof, the Muses Palace rungWith endless Cries, and endless songs he sung. To bless good sakil Laurus would be first,But sakil's Prince, and sakil's God he curst. sakil without distinction threw his Bread,Despised the Flatt'rer, but the Poet fed. His sword the Muses great Defender draws,T' assert Britannia's, and Religion's Cause. Orson their Head, the bold Brigantes brings,subject of late, to the North-saxon Kings. Now for their Liberty they boldly speak,And thro' the Foe, to joyn Prince Arthur, break. Osron's Example all the Region fired,With noble Heats, and Martial Thoughts inspired. None in the Field did greater Courage show,Whither he charged, or else sustained the Foe. Yet none more fit in Council to preside,And in a storm, the lab'ring state to guide. A mighty Genius of uncommon Mould,As Caesar Eloquent, as Caesar Bold. He could th' unstable People's Tumults stop,And a declining Kingdom underprop. Matured by Age, and business of the state,The hoary Oracle in Council sate. Where he the British Nestor was esteemed,And all his Language, Inspiration seemed. This finished statesman did the Prince perswadeTo pass the seas, the saxon to invade. And at his Landing quick Assistance brought,And for his Country none more bravely fought. The farthest Western soil, which with their WaveThe British, and Hibernian Oceans lave. From Isca's Noble stream, far as the shoreWhere round Bolerium's Head the Billows roar,By the Danmonian Britons was possest,And with King Cador's, temperate Empire blest,This war-like People, at their King's Command,Now take up Arms, and muster thro' the Land. The good King Cador worn with War and Age,No longer does the Foe in Arms engage. Macor his son supplied the Father's Place,Whose Virtues equaled his Illustrious Race. To serve Prince Arthur, and his righteous Cause,His sword the brave Danmonian Hero draws. A beauteous Youth, whose Breast a strong desireOf Fame, and Martial Glory did inspire. Eager of War, he the Danmonians led,And shone in splendid Armour at their Head. His coming, Joy to all the Britons gives,And in his Arms, the Prince his Friend receives. To whom to be endeared, he always strove,By all expressions of Respect and Love. The Valiant Youth he did with Honours grace,To his high Merit due, and noble Race. Macor, mean time, Prince Arthur did adore,None served his Cause, or sought his Favour more. Tracar, and Ormes in the Camp arrive,Whose Presence to the rest, fresh Courage give. Their Wisdom was by Fame aloud proclaimed,The Britons none with greater Honour named. Both fit about a Monarch to abide,To aid his Counsels, and the state to guide. None more admired for clear, unerring sense,For Piercing sight, and charming Eloquence. Great spirits both, but of a different Mould,Ormes impetuous, Turbulent, and Bold;But Tracar was composed, sedate, and cool,His Passions subject to a stricter Rule. Ormes was haughty, inaccessible,And knew his Riches, and his sense too well. Tracar was courteous, easie of Access,Of great Humanity, and mild Address. Ormes was therefore honoured not desired,Tracar beloved, and equally admired. Ormes would still advance unbounded Power,Tracar his Country's Liberty secure. Tracar had Letters, Ormes Native Fire:Both had by Birth, what Labour can't acquire. Arthur to neither Rival Wit inclines,But used them both, to serve his wise Designs. such Love the Britons to the Prince exprest,Who when he found his Numbers thus encreast,Advanced his Ensigns, and to Isca came,Where the silures dwelt, the chief for Fame. Hither fresh squadrons to the Prince resort,Which from that time is called great Arthur's CourtFive times the sun had his Diurnal RaceCompleated, when from this delightful placeThe pious Prince his Ensigns moved, and cameTo Glevum, seated on sabrina's stream. Decamping hence, his armed Battalions gainPrince Arthur at their Head, the fertile PlainBy easie Marches, where Gallena stood,Which Thamisis laves with its noble Flood. Thus stood the Britons, after his Defeat,Octa with Grief did to his Coasts Retreat. As when by chance a Royal Eagle spies,From some high Mountains Top, amidst the skies;A flight of swans, obscuring all the Air,swift as the Lightning, which he's said to bear,Upon the Prey his Airy Flight he takes,And with sharp Pounces vast Destruction makes. some fall struck dead, some wounded slowly fly,While snowy Clouds of Feathers fill the sky. Those that the fierce Invader's strokes survive,With all the speed, Fear to their Wings can give;To their beloved Cayster's Banks return,And in their reedy seats, their Wounds and Losses mourn. so fared the saxons, and their shattered Fleet,Octa forthwith Commands his Lords to meetIn Council, where they in long order sateT' advise what best might save their threatened state. Cissa first spoke, an able CounsellourLet us assemble all our present power,And straight advance the Britons to Attack,Who to our Arms can small Resistance make. sore with their Wounds, and weary with their Toil,They tempt the saxons to an easie spoil. Boldly fall on, before their Troops are eased,With Food and Rest, and with Recruits increased. Your Wisdom thus, and Courage will appear,Who tho defeated, have not learned to fear. The Foe surprized must to your Mercy yield,Or to their ships Retreating, quit the Field. He ceased, then Osred, who had always wonBy his wise Counsel great Applause, begun:Our late Defeat has too much Terrour strook,Thro' all our Troops, too much our Empire shook,And too much fleshed the Foe, to let me joynIn this Advice, my Counsels more inclineTo draw into the Field our utmost PowerFrom all the saxon states, and to secureOur Empire, let us labour to perswadeThe Pict, and scotish King, to give us Aid. The Cause and Interest is the same of all,They and their Gods, if we are crushed, must fall. Our Arms united in a numerous Host,We may before of certain Conquest boast. The trembling Foe unable to withstandsuch mighty Armies, will forsake the Land. But if supported with vain hopes they stay,They fall into our hands an easie Prey. Pascentius next, a wise Nestorian head,Whose Looks, and Words profound Attention bred:Thus spoke--'tis true our Troops while thus dismaied,And of Prince Arthur's Fame, and Arms afraid,From present Action justly may disswade. seeking the Foe we too great Danger run,Emboldened by his Victory lately won. And thus far Osred's Thoughts and mine you seeConspire, as in the rest they disagree. If with our utmost Force we meet our Foes,To too much hazard we our state expose. Th' uncertain Game of War they little know,That stake an Empire on a single Throw. While we delay to gather all our Force,And to the Picts and scots, shall have recourse;Prince Arthur will advance, and mightier grow,Like rolling Balls, that gather up the snow,Or Rivers taking streams in, as they flow. The Britons led by ancient Prophecies,Expect that near this time, a Prince shall riseHeroick, Wise, a mighty Conqueror,That all their lost Dominions shall restore,And o'er the World, extend their Naval Power. something like this, our Augurs seem to fear,From Prodigies, and signs that oft appear. Those hopes they all of Arthur now express,Drawn by his Fame abroad, and late success. While this Belief, tho' false, the Briton warms,He grows less fearful of the saxon Arms. He'll be more bold in Fight, while thus inspired,And with such Zeal, and Expectation fired. Intoxicated thus Men Wonders do,And by bold Deeds, make their vain Fancies true. He therefore serves King Octa, that creates,An Understanding first, between the states. An Embassy may to the Prince be sent,To treat how Blood and ruin to prevent,They may propose the Kingdom to divide,And offer Octa's Daughter for his Bride,Fair, Ethelina, whose perverted Mind,To Christian Worship is too much inclined. He ceased, and his Advice did chiefly please,And of the Council most declared for Peace. The Lords dispersed, King Octa unresolved,Long in his Mind his troubled Thoughts revolved. With strong contending Tydes of Passion prest,Now War he looks on, now on Peace, as best. Long he appeared on Osred's Counsel bent,And to the Neighb'ring saxon Princes sent,That all, the strong Necessity might knowOf joyning Arms, against the Common Foe. At the same time an Embassy he sends,To make the Pict, and scotish King his Friends. That of their powerful Aid he might not fail,If Arthur, and his Britons should prevail. But when he heard, that Arthur had as farAs Glevum's Walls, advanced the threatning War,Observing that the saxons were dismaid,And not yet strengthened by his Neighbours Aid,He now declared, it was his setled sense,A Treaty with the Briton to Commence. Then Orators he sent without delay,Who to the Britons Camp direct their way. Titullan, selred, and wise Theocles
        For this Negotiation chieflly please. Heldured of the Embassy was one,Osrick and Thedred noble Ormar's son. Arriving at the Prince's Camp, they foundThe British Youth in Crowds disperst around. For then with various sports, and manly Play,The Britons solemnized, th' auspicious Day,Of Arthur's Birth, o'er all the Fields they spred,To different Games, by different Passions led. Here Chariots raising Clouds of Dust appear,And run with smoaking Wheels their swift Career. Here the robust Danmonian Nation swarms,Hurling their massy Balls with vig'rous Arms. Here the Dobunians to advance their Fame,Toil at their Country's old laborious Game. Long Ashen staves across their shoulders lie,Then swaied with both their Hands, strike thro the sky. A mounting Orb of Thongs, or well sowed Hide,While at due distance ranged, on th' other sideThe Foe inclining stands, to wait its Fall,And with like Force, strike Back the bounding Ball. Incircled Wrestlers here their Manhood try,And with loud shouts, that rend the lab'ring sky,The standing Ring proclaims the Victory. some to a Cudgel prize their Fellows dare,Who strait spring out to meet the wooden War. They brandish in the Air their threat'ning staves,Their Hands, a woven Guard of Osier saves,In which they fix their Hazel Weapon's End,Thus armed, the nimble Combatants contendFor Conquest, giving and receiving Blows,And down their Heads a crimson River flows. Here flowry Garlands their proud Temples crown,Whose airy Feet the Race had newly won. such were the Britons sports, as thro' the ThrongThe saxon Orators passed slow along. Who strait were to th' August Pavilion led,Where Arthur sate, his Lords around him spread. To whom Edburga thus,The saxon King, whose ardent wishes areTo save Britannia, from Destructive War. Who rather seeks t' enjoy the Fruits of Peace,Then by his Arms his Empire to encrease. Makes such Advances for these glorious Ends,As may the Britons make his lasting Friends. The saxons, and the Britons shall commandTheir equal shares, of the divided Land. such Barrier shall be fixt, as shall secureThe Britons, jealous of the saxon Power. To give Britannia Peace, we condescendTo yield up what our Arms can well defend. such steps King Octa makes for Peace, besideThat both may yet with closer Bonds be tied,Bright Ethelina, Octa's chief Delight,shall be the Link, the Nations to unite. This so much envied Favorite of Fame,Whom all with Love, and Admiration name. Octa consents shall be your beauteous Bride,To you already, in her Faith Allied. These Measures all Contentions may adjust,Friendship confirm, and fix a mutual Trust. But if rejected, Octa does declareHe's guiltless of the dire effects of War. Upon the Christians Head, will rest the GuiltOf all the Blood, that by the sword is spilt. The Prince replied,Affairs of that Importance to the state,Require our thoughtful Care and calm Debate. The two Proposals by King Octa made,For lasting Friendship, shall be duly weighed. Twice had the sun broke from the Purple East,Twice was he seen dilated in the West. When Arthur seated on his Chair of state,Thus spake, the saxons with Attention wait. An honourable Peace my Thoughts prefer,To all the Triumphs of a Bloody War. I, and my Britons, those just Terms approve,King Octa makes t' establish Peace and Love,To spare each Nation's Blood, and save the IsleFrom Desolation, and destructive spoil. Indulgent heaven is to both Nations kind,That has your King to peaceful Thoughts inclined. Ten Lords of saxon, ten of British Blood,May meet at spina near Cunetio's FloodT' adjust the Limits of each Nation's Power,And Barriers fix, that may their Peace secure. You for an Interview, the place will name,Where I may see the beauteous saxon Dame. He ceased, and all the Audience poured around,To this assented with a murmuring sound. A sudden Joy did in their Eyes appear,While smiling Peace, triumphed o'er vanquished War. Mean time the Infernal Monarch wings his Flight,To the White Hills, whence his Angelick sightMight all the Fields, and subject plains survey,Where in their Camp, the hateful Britons lay. While with malicious Eyes around he viewed,The Christian Army filled with Joy, he stoodWith Rage dilated, and with Envy blown,Like glowing Aetna, on Plinlimon thrown. Flashes of Fire from his red Eyeballs flowed,Like Lightning breaking from a lowring Cloud. so when a Toad, squat on a Border spies,The Gardner passing by, his bloodshot EyesWith spite, and Rage inflamed, dart Fire aroundThe verdant Walks, and on the flowry Ground,The bloated Vermin loathsome Poison spits,And swoln and bursting with his Malice sits. so the faln Angel sate, and thus begun,Am I, and all th' infernal Powers outdone?And must this Briton still pursue his Course,And thus elude my Arts, and all my Force?What Christian Towns, and states have I destroied,Forced by my Power, or by my Arts decoied?How few remaining Christian Regions are,Where no deep Marks of my Revenge appear?What glorious Ruin did my Romans spreadO'er Asia's Christians; I the Lombards led,And furious Huns, to rich Ausonia's soil;And filled the Land with Blood, and Christian spoil,My Maxamin's, and Nero's, mighty Names,What Desolation, by devouring Flames,What slaughter by the sword, these Heros made,With what success did they the saints invade?And if the Fame be true that spreads in Hell,In Gaul a Prince shall arise, that shall excelAll these, and more in Blood and spoil delight,And all Hell's Furies to his Aid invite. Let that great Prince arise, and may his Birth,Be honoured with Convulsions of the Earth,Eclipses, Comets, Meteors, Lightnings, storms,Murders, and Monsters of tremendous Forms. Not are there Triumphs of my Power alone,Much weaker spirits, have great Conquests won. spirits of Lower Order, small renown,In Hell of little Figure, scarcely known. Inferiour, subaltern Divinities,Could often their just Fury to appease,To wreck their Rage, and honest Malice cloy,Whole Armies of this hateful sect destroy:First tempt th' ungrateful Murmurers to Rebel,And then with Plagues and Darts invisible,With Fire, and Earthquakes lay all wast, disseizeTheir God, and ruin all his Votaries. And shall this Briton all my Force defy,And introduce his banished Deity?High states of Hell, ye mighty Gods below,In your August Assemblies who will Bow,Who Acclamations make when I appear,Who dread my Power, my Greatness who revere?If still this Briton shall resist my Power,And all my Arts eluded, rest secure?But if by irresistable DecereePronounced by Fate, and unchanged Destiny;Arthur at last must mount the British Throne,Beat down our Altars, and erect his own. At least new hardships shall obstruct his Way,And my Revenge his Triumphs shall delay. That said he Flew, his snakie Wings displaied,Down to his Palace midst th' Infernal shade. From all their gloomy Regions to his Court,At his Command, th' Infernal Lords resort. To whom their Monarch from his glowing Throne,Thus with a haughty, troubled Look begun. Thus far in vain all our Attempts are made,To crush the Britons that our state invade. At sea, they Triumph o'er King Octa's Fleet,At Land, success above their Hopes, they meet. Octa defeated, dreads Prince Arthur's Arms,And sues for Peace, by Ethelina's Charms. If this should once prevail, Britannia's lost,We, and our Priests, must fly this impious Coast. Helped by th' Almighty Enemy of Hell,They yet our Arms escape, our Power repel. Then Monarch's War with vast advantage wage,When heaven its Power does on their part Engage. This sure Expedient's left us to annoyThe Britons, and their tow'ring Hopes destroy. Let us provoke them to some dire Offence,Which may against their Armies, heaven incense. Then the seraphick Guards, that round them ly,Or else patroling thro' the Region fly,scowring the Hills and Vales; with flaming Arms,The Christians to protect from our Alarms;These will displeased, withdraw their powerful Aid,And we with safety may their Camp invade. What subtile spirit of seducing Art,And skill in tempting, will perform this part?Then filthy Asmodai who Men inspiresWith wanton Passions, and unclean Desires,Whose leud Adorers stand before his shrine,Transformed to lustful Goats, and loathsome swine,Thus spake: This grateful Province I embrace,I from their Minds will virtuous Passions chase. My stronger Force shall all chast Thoughts expel,And heaven's weak Flames, shall yield to those of Hell. To solemn Groves, and lonesom Hermits Cells,Where boasted Chastity in Triumph dwells,To Cloystered Monks Admission I command,And can a Camp my powerful Charms withstand?On me such chosen spirits shall attend,Whose skill and Power will most promote my End. The Gods of Riot, Luxury, and Wine,
        In this Attempt shall all their Forces joyn. Doubt not great Prince, when we their Camp Assail,Nature is on our side, we shall prevail. Th' Infernal Diet with his Language moved,With loud Applause the wise Design approved. straight Asmodai attended with a TrainOf soft Luxurious spirits, to the PlainDirects his Flight, where the glad Britons lay;With lab'ring Wings he mounts the steepy Way,And quickly reached the tender Verge of Day. In Companies distinct the Britons sate,Pleased with their wished success, and prosp'rous Fate. When to the Camp the Crew Infernal came,Grasping in either hand Tartarean Flame. About from Tent to Tent the Demons flew,And midst the Troops their flaming Torches threw. The wanton Fires about their Bosoms play,And to their Hearts lascivious warmth convey. The soft Contagion glides along their Veins,And in their Breasts the pleasing Poison reigns. straight all in Riot and Debauches joyn,Dissolve in Mirth, and sit inflamed with Wine. The Captains snore on scarlet spread beneath,And with their lab'ring Breasts contend for Breath. Tables o'erturned and broken swords betwixt,And Dishes faln, with Armour intermixt,Helmets and Harness, and bruised Goblets by,A mad Confusion, make of War, and Luxury:Acted with lustful Fires, from Town to TownCommanders and their Men promiscuous run. With Outrages and ravished Virgins spoils,The vicious Army all the Land defiles. Whoredoms in Pagan Cities they commit,And at their sacrifices feasting sit. Heated with leud Religion, Lust, and WineThey in the Worship of their Idols join. Then to the Camp the hot Adulterers leadTheir Pagan Women and avow the Deed. Th' Angelick Guards th' enormous vices saw,And in Displeasure from their Camp withdraw,All Hell with shouts of Triumph did resound,That such success had all their Wishes crownedThe Prince of Hell strait summons from beneathThe chief supporter of the Throne of Death,Vengeful Megaera, she without DelayFrom Hell's Abyss ascends, and in her WayGathers raw Damps and steams from noisome Graves,And putrid Reeks, from subterranean Caves;Where spotted Plagues first draw their poisonous Breath,The Nurseries of Pain, and Magazines of Death. These seeds of Torment, and devouring Heats,From whose Contagion vanquished Life retreats,Megaera in compacted Hides dark Wombs,For this infernal Purpose made, entombs. In their distinct Repositories laid,sad choice of Death, she various Plagues conveied. Armed for Destruction thus the Fury Came,And brought from Asmodai's, a different Flame. Then Wolves were heard in neighb'ring Hills to howl,Th' illboding Raven and the screaching Owlsung o'er the Camp by Night, the sun by Day,Distained with Blood, shone with a dismal Ray. The cruel Fury strait her Flight did takeTo find her Prince, to whom th' Apostate spake. Go, glut thy Rage, and let the Britons know,Hell's Monarch is not yet a vanquished Foe. Pass thro their Camp with thy accustomed Hast,And on them all thy deadly Treasures wast. strait did the vengeful Minister prepare,T' infect the Camp, and poison all the Air. Her Bottles turgid with imprisoned Deathshe opened, and released the fatal Breath. In livid Wheels the dire Contagion flies,And putrid Exhalations taint the skies. The Region's choaked with Pestilential steams,Malignant Reeks, raw Damps, and soultry Gleams. Now with their Breath the hot Infection slidesInto their Breasts, and thro' their Vitals glides. Their Lab'ring Hearts spout out the flowing Blood,And fry the Limbs with an Aetnean Flood. The raging Pest'lence chases thro' the VeinsRetreating Life, and drest in purple Reigns. While other Plagues run colder to the Heart,And thro' their Breast strike like a poisoned Dart. Racked with tormenting Pain some gasping lie,some only breath th' envenomed Air, and die. Their Hearts with chill, congealing Blood opprest,Throb a few moments in their panting Breast,Then yield, and from their Vital Labour rest. In vain for Help, in vain for Drugs they cry,Friends and Physicians come, but with them dy. Thro' all the Camp the fierce Destruction's spread,Deforming every Tent with Heaps of Dead. Mean time the pious Arthur prostrate laid,Thus in a Flood of Tears dissolving praied:Great King of heaven, thy Arm thou makest bare,T' invade the Britons with resistless War. Thy glitt'ring sword brandished with dreadful sway,Does thro our Camp with wide Destruction slay. Why did thy Aids the shipwreckt Britons save,From Rocks and Tempests, and th' insulting Wave,If we must only see our Native Isle,And with our Dead th' encumbered Land defile?Th' insulting Heathen will Blaspheme thy Name,And in their songs advance their Idols Fame. To their vain Gods loud Praises they'll return,And Hecatombs upon their Altars burn. spare yet thy Britons, let some Reliques live,That may due Honours to thy Temples give. Let the Destroyer cease at thy Command,And Death at thy Rebuke arrested, stand. And may the Crimes that heaven provoke, be known,That our deep sorrows may its Wrath atone. The pious Prince's humble Cries succeed,And glorious Raphael with Angelick speedDescends, his sword of Flame drawn in his Hand,To chase the fierce Destroyer from the Land. A Crystal Vial full of Od'rous Fumes,Ambrosial Balm, and rich Etherial Gums;His other hand poured out upon the Air,To cure the Damps, and noxious Vapours there. Megaera flies the bright Archangel's sword,The Plague was staid, and Health and Life restored. Then to the room swift Raphael Wings his way,Where Arthur still devoutly prostrate lay. To whom the seraph thus:heaven by the Britons daring Crimes incensed,Almighty Wrath severely has dispenced!Your unprotected Camp it did expose,To the dire Rage of your Infernal Foes. Who by Divine Permission soon o'erspreadYour guilty Camp, with putrid Heaps of Dead. Th' Angelick Guards returned to Heaven, complainedThat your flagitious Troops you n'er restrained. Your Captains boldly VVhoredoms, Riots, RapesCommit, and yet each Criminal escapes. Thus you avow the Ills, by others done,And their unpunished Guilt, becomes your own. Had your Vindictive Arm been first emploied,heaven's had not thus your guilty Troops destroied. But now th' Eternal yielding to your Prayer,Has sent me from his Throne, with speedy CareTo stay the Plague, and make the Fiend retreat,That spreads the Poison, to her stygian seat. heaven's now appeased, may ne'er the Britons dareBy their Revolting, to renew the War. The seraph disappeared, and Arthur raisedUpon his Feet, th' Eternal Goodness praised. "
"11","Prince Arthur. BOOK VII. THE Prince of Hell that on the Mountain staid,And with Infernal Joy around surveiedThe Camp, where Death did in sad Triumph reign,With wide Destruction, covering all the Plain. Thus to himself: At last I have prevailed. Against this sect, tho other Arts have failed. Their Troops half ruined with the Plague, affordAn easie Conquest, for King Octa's sword;I'll break the Peace, although advanced so far,And finish their Destruction by new War. Arthur, prepare against the saxon Arms,'Tis time enough for Ethelina's Charms. Heros delaied, and disappointed, prizeThe Crown, that got too cheaply, they despise. Pleasures the farther off, the greater seem,And Toil and Danger, best preserve Esteem. That service I will do, by taking careTo give fresh Fuel to th' expiring War. That said, he leaves the Crystal Plains of Light,And to th' Infernal Regions takes his Flight. There stands a Rock, dashed with the breaking WaveOf troubled styx, where was a gloomy CaveFlowing with Gore, the fierce Bellona dwells,And bound with Adamantine Fetters, Yells. Around stand Heaps of mosly sculls, and Bones,Whence issue loud Laments, and dreadful Groans. Torn Limbs, and mangled Bodies are her Food,Her Drink whole Bowls of Wormwood, Gall, and Blood. Long curling snakes her Head with Horrour crown,And on he rsquallid Back hang lolling down. This gripes a bloody Dart, the other HandGrasps of Infernal Fire, a flaming Brand. Treason, and Usurpation near allied,Haughty Ambition, and elated Pride,And Cruelty, with bloody Garlands crowned,Rapine, and Desolation stand around. With these Injustice, Violence, Rage remain,And ghastly Famine, with her meagre Train. This savage Rout to Gallia now resort,Drawn by the Fame of proud Versallia's Court. There these Attendants on their Master wait,And with their odious Forms, compose his horrid state. To this wild Den now did th' Apostate fly,Resolving all Bellona's Aid to try. At his Approach the Monsters cease their Din,And bow at distance with a dreadful Grin. The stygian Prince, the Fury soon unchains,strait double Rage boils in her swelling Veins. Then thus he spoke, to Octa's Palace fly,Attended with persidious Treachery,And various Discord, let thy Arts perswadeThat Prince, the ruined Britons to invade. Go raise new Tumults, and dissolve the Peace,For this high Task Bellona I release. Charged with these dire Commands, she flies away,To the superiour Regions, blest with Day. Near Peak's aspiring Mount, and spacious Wood,And the green Banks of Dovus Crystal Flood. A wide-mouthed Den, th' admiring Traveller seesWith thorny shrubs o'er-spread, and shady Trees;That downward goes unfathomably deep,Beneath the subterranean Vaults, that keepImprisoned Damps, and Winds tumultuous store,And the low Caves, where falling Waters roar. It passes thro' the Bowels of the Earth,And the rich Beds, where Metals have their Birth,Till it reveals the gloomy Mouth of Hell,Bellona freed from her infernal Cell,Thro' this dire Gulph ascends with hasty Flight,And soon emerges in the Fields of Light. The Air grew dark, the Rocks, and Mountains struckWith Horrour, at the Fury's Presence shook. The sphears disordered roll, the starting sunsprings from the heavenly Course he used to run. The Moon all drowned in Blood, and blazing stars,Portended Tumults, and destructive Wars. straight to King Octa's Court the Fury comes,And Acha Octa's Mother's shape assumes. Then thus she spoke. From blest Elysian Gardens I descendTo teach thee how to gain a glorious EndOf all thy Labours, and thy warlike Toil,And fix thy Empire o'er the British Isle. heaven has decreed that here thy Race shall reign,And therefore has the hateful Britons slainWith a destructive Plague, and poisoned Dartsshot from above, into their impious Hearts. Not half their Troops survive, make hast my sonTheir Ruine to compleat, by heaven begun. Run then to Triumph, hast to certain spoil,And chase the cursed Nation from the Isle. You see how much your League the Gods offend,Let not their Enemy, be Octa's Friend. They must not be to us by Blood allied,Nor Ethelina be a Briton's Bride. That said, a spotted Viper from her Head,she to his Bosom secretly conveied. The poisonous Vermin, with infernal ArtGlides thro' his Breast, and twines about his Heart. The secret Poison wanders thro' his Veins,And warlike Fury o'er his spirits reigns. Hence straight-way to the Picts and scottish Court,The Fury, and her hellish Train resort. Where they to bloody Wars sound loud AlarmsAnd make the barb'rous Nations fly to Arms. Mean time, the saxon Monarch raving flewAbout the Court, and soon together drewThe chiefest Lords, and thus himself exprest,It was resolved to give the Britons Rest;The Land between the Nations to divide,And that the Princess should be Arthur's Bride. But heaven against his Treaty does declare,And singly with the Britons wages War. In vain we offer what they can't enjoy,We spare the Men, heaven labours to destroy. Avenging Gods from their high Regions came,Armed with bright swords of keen, Etherial Flame,And fatal Darts of pointed Lightnings made,And with sure Death the British Camp invade. Their trembling Reliques fall our certain Prey,heaven sounds th' Alarm, and we must heaven obey. Tho we by sea their Power could not withstand,Our Gods more potent are, then theirs by Land. Th' unfinished Conquest we may soon compleatOr from this Isle oblige them to retreat. This fair occasion let our Arms improveTo fix our Power, and all our Fears remove. He ceased, and all his Captains War desired,And sprang into the Field with Martial Heat inspired. straight Orders are dispacht for all to Arm,And thro' the Cities sounds the loud Alarm. The tremb'ling Husbandman his Toil forbears,Fells his tall Ash, and shapes long staves for spears. some sighing o'er their Anvils forge the BladesOf swords, instead of Hooks, and rural spades. Huge Gauntlets some, some hollow Helmets beat,And some o'er brazen Backs, and Breastplates sweat. some shape their Darts, and some their Javelins Points,Or fit their pollished Armour's Manly Joints. shap'ning their Arrows Heads, some stand inclined,some on revolving stones their Axes grind. some serve on foot, some take the Horseman's Launce,And to the Field their foaming Coursers praunce. In hast, some from their high roofed Halls hung round,With all the horrid Pride of War, and crownedWith dusty Trophies, take their massy shield,And flaming sword, and fly into the Field. some clasp their Helmets on, some snatch their spear,And polished Buckler, and in Arms appear. Ensigns displaied, and Trumpets voice delightThe saxon Youth, and martial Minds excite. The lighted Beacons from the Hills declare,As blazing Comets do, approaching War,The flaming signals giv'n, the Regions roundWith Hors'men, Arms, and warlike noise resound. As whenIn some great Town a Fire breaks out by Night,And fills with crackling Flames, and dismal Light,With sparks, and Pitchy smoak th' astonished sky,Th' affrighted Guards, that first the Flame espy,straight giveth' Alarm, and spread the dreadful Cry. Th' amazed Inhabitants the signal take. And run in Crowds half cloathed, and half awake,To stop the spreading Ruin, and to tameWith spouting Engines the destructive Flame. so when the frightful Cry of War begun,Into the Fields in Troops the saxons run. Now Muse relate, and in their Order nameThe People, that from different Regions came. What famed Commanders did their squadrons head,And what great Lords their valiant subjects led,First the stout Cantian saxon, from the Land,That bravely once did Caesar's Arms withstand,Where Joyful Nature, sits in Plenty crowned,Hesperian Woods, and sylvan scenes surround,Her shady Throne, that with rich Fruit abound. Of these some on the flowry Banks reside,Of fair Medvaga, that with wanton Pride,Forms silver Mazes with her crooked Tide. The Durobrovian Youth of war-like Fame,And bold Vagniacans, together came,With those about the fruitful Region bred,Where Durovernum, reers her stately Head. They march from Thanotos, and from her Towers,Her valiant Youth sublime Rutupia pours. Rutupia, whose rich Gems, and Pearly storeInticed Victorious Caesar, to her shore. Their chief Commanders were great Amades,
        Valiant Theodriek, Osred, and with theseHengist, a splendid Youth, the Blood, and NameOf the first saxon, of Illustrious Fame,That from the Belgick shore, to Albion came. From the fat Glebe they come, and flowry LandWhich the stout Trinobantes, did Command. Augusta sends her warlike Youth, a TownOf ancient Fame, to Forraign Merchants known,Ev'n then for Naval Power of great Renown. But since her stately Head is raised so high,Her glorious Towers surmount the wondring sky. Her Royal Fleets the watry World controll,Where the vast Ocean can his Billows roll,Far as the Indies, and from Pole to Pole. Her Power by trembling, Neighbour states is feared,By distant Empires, and new Worlds revered. Her bellowing Oaks, with louded Thunder roar,Then what annoied them, on their Hills before,shaking the Gallick, and the Belgian shore. Britannia's Head she reigns in Wealth and Ease,Mart of the World, and Emp'ress of the seas. Edgar and Cissa, both Illustrious Names,From the delightful Banks of famous Thames,Into the Field, Augusta's squadrons bring,None fought more bravely for the saxon King. They from the Forests come, whose sports inviteAugusta's Youth, that in the Woods delight. From the sweet Gardens of the fruitful East,With smiling Flowers, and od'rous saffron blest. From Camelodunum pop'lous once, and proudOf its famed Colony of Roman Blood. From round Canonium, armed with swords and shields,The warlike People March, and from the FieldsWhere Idumanum verdant Wealth bestows,Whose wanton Tide in wreathing Volumes flows,still forming Reedy Islands, as it goes. Brave sebert led them, valiant Oga's son,Whose Arms had great Renown in Battel won. The chearful Youth from Verolamium came,A Town of ancient, and illustrious Fame. Where fortified with Trenches, Lakes and Wood,The valiant Casibellan, once withstoodThe Roman Arms, obliged at last to yield,Where Caesar fights, who can maintain the Field?since cherished by th' indulgent Conquerour,The City was advanced in Wealth and Power. Its Towers, gilt Fanes, and Palaces did rise,Darting Terrestrial Glories thro' the skies. Now where the City stood, the Ploughman toils,And as he works, turns up old Roman spoils,Medals and Coins, enrich th' admiring Clown,Pavements and Urns, by ancient Figures known. From the rich seats they came, from whence their swordThe Coritanian chased, the rightful Lord. From all the Towns, around the spacious WoodNear which sublime Tripontium's Castles stood. From Bannavenna well-armed squadrons came,And Durobrevis, on Aufona's stream. Their chief Commanders were brave Alopas,
        And valiant Egbert, both of Horsa's Race. They came, who dwelt along the southern Coast,On which the German Ocean's Waves are tost. The soil the brave Icenian Britons blestWith Peace, and envied Plenty, once possest. Venta they left, where Garienus Tide,Does to the Bosom of Bardunus glide,An ancient, wealthy Town that did abound,With warlike Youth, and ruled the soil around. High Branodunum does her squadrons send,Where Roman Arms, did once the Coast defend. They leave the Towns along fair Theta's Flood,And happy soil, where Gariononum stood. Those from the Banks of winding stourus came,And the rich Town, that bore Faustinus name. They come from Oza's Banks, and from the LandWhich lofty Combritonium did Command. This numerous saxon Youth, that then obeiedKing Ella's Laws, advance to Octa's Aid. Ella their Valiant Prince, was at their Head,And to the Field, his warlike People led. From Camboritum, and the Neighb'ring Hills,The chearful Youth drawn out, the Region fills:From Camboritum, then a warlike Town,since for the Muses seat, much better known. Her learned sons have gained Immortal Fame,And high as heaven, have raised Britannia's Name. Redwal, whose Lands a vast Revenue yield,Led them, compleatly armed into the Field. They leave the reedy Lakes, and marshy soil,Once happy by the British Farmers Toil. Now the vext Land a Forreign Master knows,Which o'er the Country, like a Deluge flows,That from the sea, the Banks born down, is rolled,And o'er their Fields advances uncontrolled. The Valiant Youth from all the Region goes,Which Trent and Lindis, confluent streams, enclose. High Margadunum, all her squadrons lends,And stately Lindum, which her Power extendsO'er the wide Province, her Battalions sends. Mighty Ebissa, from the Fenny LandInto the Field, did lead this warlike Band. Orla, and Imerick, a Valiant Lord,Famed for his strength, and vast unweildy sword,Drew all their squadrons, and Battalions forth,From all their Towns, that lay the farthest North. King Cerdic from the West his Army brought,Who for the saxon Empire bravely fought. He all the saxon Heros far excessed,Whose conquering Arms, were never yet repelled. A great Commander, Brave and Fortunate,That founded first the Western saxon state. Those seated on Halenus verdant BanksDraw out, and Muster their Victorious Ranks. They March from Tresantona's Crystal Flood,From Venta's Downs, and Regnum's spacious Wood. From rich Clusentum, and fair Vecta's Isle,From Briga and segontium's fertile soil. On sorbiodunum's Plains armed Youth appears,With nodding Plumes, and moving Groves of spears. The famous Captain, who had chief Command,That with his Prince came to invade the Land,Was Lothar, born on Belgick Mosa's Flood,Whose noble Veins were filled with Royal Blood:Him did fair Emme Cerdic's sister bear,And dying, left him to her Brother's Care. With all this strength King Octa takes the Field,Nor doubts, but Arthur to his Arms must yield. The Britons now a solemn Fast proclaimTo mourn their Guilt, and take th' attendant shame. To own the dreadful Plague, their Crimes desert,And by their Grief, like Judgments to avert. That heaven appeased, from its relenting HandMay drop its Bolt, and spare the threatened Land. sorrow untaught on every Face appeared,And only sighs and sad Laments were heard. They weep aloud, and mourn their impious Fall,And with united Prayers for Mercy call. The prostrate Penitents for Pardon Cry,And from heaven's Justice, to its Pity fly. To Grief, and flowing Tears, no Bounds are giv'n,Th' Artillery alone, that Conquers heaven. Righteous Resolves fill every humble Mind,And all in Vows of blest Obedience joyned. The mournful Camp's a scene of pious WoeWhere thro' their Eyes, their Hearts dissolving flow. Their loud and fervent supplications, riseAbove the Clouds, and penetrate the skies. Contending thus with heaven they weep, and pray,And strive to turn th' impending storm away,That charged with Vengeance o'er their Camp appeared,More Plagues they had deserved, and therefore feared. Prince Arthur, that in Piety was chief,And now chief mourner, thus exprest his Grief,Th' attentive Britons hear, and hope Relief. Of Wrath Divine, what Vials have been poured,And emptied on our Heads, that hath devouredThe guilty Britons, and our Camp consumed;Where piled in Heaps, the Dead, the Dead entombed!Th' Eternal's sword around did widely wast,And carried Death, and Ruin where it past. It reeked in Blood, and shone with slaughter diedRed, as the Crimson sins, that for its Vengeance cried. This day we deprecate the Curse, and allWith wounded souls, for heaven's Compassion call. To still the storms of Wrath that on us beat,And cause the fiery Torrent to retreat. The God we Worship Jealous is, and Pure,His Wrath advances slow, but reaches sure. His threat'ning Arm does long extended stay,But then descends with the more fearful sway. Who then can his consuming Fire withstand,Who bear the strokes of his Revenging Hand?There's hope your Prayers have found success above,And heaven atoned, will this fierce Plague remove. May ne'er our impious Crimes, his Arm provokeTo end our Ruin, by a second stroke. He ceased. His Men their sacred Vows renew,And for Devotion to their Tents withdrew. Where while Celestial Warmth their Breasts extend,The Day in Prayers, and Hymns of Praise they end. heaven the Returning Penitents embraced,And far away th' Infernal Legions chased. Their Guardian Angels once more take their Post,Drawn out in bright Array, around their Host. Twice had the sun with dawning Glories blestThe World, and called the Lab'rer from his rest,As oft the Night her sable Vesture, setWith pearly Dew, ascends her Throne of Jet. When certain Tydings Arthur's Camp alarmed,That Octa's Men against the Britons armed,Believing that the Britons thus distrest,By saxon Arms, might be with Ease opprest. With Octa Leagues, and Overtures of Peace,When War shall offer more advantage, cease. The Tydings soon thro' all the Army ran,Whence in their Minds tormenting Fears began. They thought their weakened Troops, could not opposeThe fierce Attack, of their insulting Foes. The trouble spreads, all, their sad state bewail,That those the Plague had spared, the sword should now assail. The pious Prince with heavy Grief opprest,To heaven thus vents the trouble of his Breast. Thou that from dark Egyptian Prisons freed,As shepherds do their Flocks, did'st Israel lead. Who from between the Cherubs, did'st displayThy heavenly Glories, to direct their Way. Whose mighty Arm extended, did secureTheir trembling Host, pursued by Pharoah's Power. shine forth, and with thy Beams dispel this Night,Whose horrid shades, my lab'ring soul affright. stir up thy strength, thy Foes, and ours invade,And bring thy shining Myriads to our Aid. Thou God of Light, reveal thy glorious Face,Thy Rays will from the sky, this Tempest chase. Thee, all the unnumbered Hosts of heaven obey,Drawn in embattled Lines, and bright ArrayAlong th' Etherial Plains, and here belowMonarchs to thee, precarious Empires owe. Prest by our Enemies, to thee we fly,How long wilt thou neglect thy People's Cry?Bathed in our Tears, and pleased with Grief, we moanOur solitary state, for God is gone. Our Foes around, despise our Mournful state,And on those Loads that press us, heap more Weight. Our Enemies enraged, no Mounds between,On us, like rising Waves, come roaring in. Against the Reliques thy fierce Wrath has spared,The Foe's Inexorable sword's prepared. On me with scorn th' insulting scoffers look,As one, whom heaven displeased has now forsook. The Pagans make my Woes their sportful Theam. Reproach thy Vot'ries, and thy Name blaspheme. stir up thy Power, thy glitt'ring Arms assume,Bowing the heavens, to our Deliverance come. As from th' aspiring Mountains, raised aroundIerusalem, while it stood, Protection found. so let a Guard, from thy bright Host detached,T' encamp about our Army be dispatched. Thou God of Truth arise, let th' Heathen see,Thy Wrath pursues perfidious Treachery. While thus Prince Arthur heavens Protection sought,The God-like Raphael, this kind Message brought. Thy Prayer prevails, O Prince, be not dismaied,Th' Almighty's Arm is strecht out for your Aid. Highly your Crimes heaven's Majesty displeased,But your Repentance hath his Wrath appeased. His People's Faults do but his Rod employ,But his fierce Vengeance shall his Foes destroy. Let not the saxon's Numbers be their Pride,You're stronger far, for God is on your sideAbundantly your Loss is thus supplied. Arise, and let the Britons Courage take,Their Arms shall drive th' advancing saxon back. The Prince with Raphael's heavenly Message cheered,Octa's unequal Force, no longer feared. His chearful Looks the drooping Britons saw,And thence reviving Warmth, and Courage draw. His God-like Language calms their troubled Minds,And with its Charms reluctant Passions binds. He to their frozen Veins new Life procures,Dispels their Doubts, and fainting Hopes assures. The Britons that before did scarcely dareT' expect it, now resolve to meet the War. They now no more the Fears of Danger own,While heaven assists, and Arthur leads them on. Mean time illboding Prodigies affrightKing Octa, and disswade his Men from Fight,The Birds of heaven the gazing Augurs scare,Crossing with inauspicious Flights the Air!The Fowl as sacred kept, projected Meat,Coldly regard, and sullenly retreat. From hollow Oaks, obscene Night Ravens sung,And clustring Bees upon their Ensigns hung. Bullocks with Garlands crowned reluctant come,Break from the Altar, and run lowing home. Near silver Thamisis sweet Banks, there stoodAwful for solemn shade, a lofty Wood. Where they adored their God Irmansul named,A war-like Idol, thro' Germania famed. His Right Hand did a flowry Garland bear,His Left held up a Balance in the Air. His Breast a grisly Bear's fierce Figure bore,And in his shield a Lyon seemed to roar. Fresh gathered Flowers dispersed in Heaps around,Gay superstition, paint their sacred Ground. Hither the saxons, and their Priests repair,T' atone their God, with Victims and with Prayer. His Aid against the Britons to invoke,While the tall Oaks with Clouds of Incense smoak. The Priests the Wood to burn the Victim lay,And a crowned Bullock at the Altar slay. Their reeking Hands, ransack in vain the Breast,To find the Heart of the prodigious Beast. The Priests grow pale, and from their Altars start,Finding a Victim slain without a Heart. But that which most the gazing saxons scare,Are Armies seen engaging in the Air. The highest ground of all th' heavenly Way,The sun had gained, darting a downright Ray. When two black Clouds appeared, one from the EastThreat'ning arose, the other from the West. They stretcht their lowring Fronts across the sky,And frowning, seemed each other to defy. Between a Glade of free and open Air,Did, as betwixt two spacious Woods, appear. Then issuing from the Womb of either Cloud,Two Armies met, and drawn in Battel stood. The sick'ning sun shone with a gloomy Ray,scared with the bloody Business of the Day. Between them straight began a furious Fight,And glitt'ring Arms supplied the want of Light. Eager of Glory from Heroick Deeds,The Airy Knights spur on their foaming steeds. They rush to Battel with a full Career,And tilting break their Lances in the Air. swords clashing swords, and shields rencountring shields,Fill with the Din of War th' Etherial Fields. Vaulting the Air, thick showers of Arrows fly,And warlike Labour troubles all the sky. A Bloody Field was fought, and Heaps of slainseemed to o'erspread the wide Etherial Plain. Chariots o'erturned, and scattered Harness by,steeds, and dismounted Riders, mingled ly. From gaping Wounds, a Crimson sea of Blood,Along the heavenly Pavement reeking flowed. At last the squadrons, in the Eastern skyFell in Disorder, and began to fly. The Conquerours hung upon their Backs, and chasedTheir Troops, with mighty Rout thro' all the Wast. Into the Clouds and heavenly Wilds they fled,And left upon the Bloody Field their Dead. Next off the Theater the Victors go,And into shapeless Air dissolving flow. The lab'ring scene, and Actors disappeared,And of the War the Airy stage was cleared. Octa that viewed th' important Prodigy,Trembled to see the Eastern Army fly. He wisely hid his Fears within his Breast,And to his Captains thus himself exprest. Let not vain Prodigies the saxons scare,Formed by the wanton Demons of the Air. Wrapt in dark Clouds, the Will of heaven's concealed,To Mortals only by th' Event revealed. Think not fantastick Portents can declareThe Fate of Kingdoms, and Results of War. These only weak, and vulgar Minds affright,Like Phantoms, borrowing Horrour from the Night. Which, as capricious Nature's Play, the wiseFrom timerous superstition free, despise. The valiant on their Arms make Fortune wait,And carve out to themselves propitious Fate. Neglect these Dreams, the Gods are ever kindTo the best Troops, and to th' undaunted Mind. Great Caesar thus contemned his Augurs Tales,Fights, and o'er Foes, and Portents too, prevails. Thus Octa strove their Passion to appease,And give them what himself enjoied not, Ease. At a small Village now unknown by Name,There dwelt a sorcerer of wondrous Fame. The Pagan Briton Merlin, that of lateFor his dire Art, driv'n from the British state;Did with the Pagan saxons safely dwell,And kept his Correspondence up with Hell. With potent Juices, and infernal Charms,The black Magician, Plagues, and Mortal Harms,And various Kinds of Mischiefs did inflictOn those, whom heaven was pleased he should afflict. He in the silent Night while Mortals sleep,By Hedg-rows, Lakes, or o'er the Hills would creep. To gather baleful Herbs, with which he drewFamiliar Fiends, that round, like Ravens, flew. Mounting his Magick Wand, he thro' the AirTo rich Nocturnal Feasts would oft repair,spread on green Hills, or near some shady Wood,Or Grassy Banks of some sweet River's Flood;Where when th' infernal Company are met,Rich Meats, and Wines on stately Tables setThey seem to taste, and by the Moon's pale Light,spend in Fantastick Luxury, the Night. But from th' imaginary Banquet come,At the gray Dawning, lank and meagre, home. King Octa's servants at their Lord's Command,With their unrighteous Wages in their Hand,To Merlin come, and soon prevaild to bringThe famed Magician, to their anxious King. Whom Octa thus bespoke,The Miracles, your sacred Art has shown,Make you thro' all the wond'ring Island known. Let your prodigious Power my Army Guard,Honour and Riches shall be your Reward. The Foe we'll now engage but let him firstBe here by you, and your Enchantments curst. Curse then this impious Enemy your BreathWill blast their strength, and fatal prove as Death. Your Curse and that of Fate, is deemed the same,And whom you bless the World does blest proclaim. Assault their Camp with all your magick Powers,You'll curse your mortal Foes, as well, as ours. Revenge your Wrongs, and by your potent Charms,Draw off the Guardian Gods, that help their Arms. Come with me then, I will a Mountain shew,From whose high Top you may their Army view. There we'll atone the Gods with Prayer and thenceYou shall your Curses on the Foe dispence. Then Octa to a Mount the sorc'rer led,Whence thro' the Vale he saw the Britons spred. seven Altars they erect, and in the Flames,seven Bullocks sacrifice, and seven Rams. Here Octa and his Lords, their Gods adored,And kneeling round the Flames, their Aid implored. At last, the Night advancing to her Noon,Merlin conducted by the silver Moon,From Octa, to a neighb'ring Hill withdraws,T' observe infernal Rites, and magick Laws. He seeks out noxious Plants, whose powerful Juice,Magicians for their strong Enchantments use. Green Henbane, Wormwood, Hemlock, savine TopIn whose prest Juice he dipt his magick sops,With Plants that to the Moon their Vertue owe,And Toadstools, that from storms of Thunder grow. Which mixt with humane Fat, red Hair, and Blood,He offers up cast on the Burning Wood. Then with his potent Wand, he walks around,And with dire Circles, marks th' enchanted ground. Then did he with a mutt'ring Voice rehearseWondrous, mysterious Words, and potent Verse. Th' infernal Charms all Nature did affright,The waning Moon straight sickned at the sight. The Hill with Horror trembled, and aroundWith howling Wolves the neighb'ring Woods resound. Then storms of Rain ensue, swift Lightnings fly,And dreadful Thunderclaps torment the sky. spectres, and Ghosts break from their hollow Tomb,And glaring round the Necromancer come. All Hell was moved, the Powers drawn from their seatsArise, while Merlin his dire words repeats. Whom with his Charms he labours to engageAgainst the Britons, and excites their Rage. His powerful Arts incline them to employUnited force, their Army to destroy. But Hell and all its Friends, vain Rage express,And Curse in vain, when heaven desires to Bless. Merlin his impious Ceremonies done,Returns to Octa with the rising sun. Before the saxon Lords he stood, preparedTo Curse their Foes, and merit his Reward. When the Magician's Breast an unknown FireLapsed from above did suddenly inspire. A warmth Divine his spirits did invade,And once a sorcerer, a Prophet made. The heavenly Fury Merlin did constrainTo Bless, whom he to Curse designed in vain. How Beautiful the Briton's Tents appear?What goodly Heads his Tabernacles Rear?As the rich Vales they spread their verdant Pride,Or flowry Gardens by the Rivers side. As shady Aloes in th' Arabian Woods,Or lofty Cedars planted by the Floods. Indulgent heaven upon the Briton poursProlifick Dews, and sweet refreshing showers. His seed shall flourish midst surrounding streams,Blest with mild Air, and pure reviving Beams. His Prince's Glory, shall his People's Love,And Neighbour Monarchs Fear, and Envy, move. He, like a fearless Unicorn shall standsure of his strength, and all the Fields command. Those hostile Nations who oppose his Power,He with resistless Fury shall devour. He'll break their crashing Bones, his Bow he'll bend,And thro' their Flesh, his piercing Arrows send. He couches like a Lyon on the sand,Like a vast Lyon in a Desart Land. stretching his fearful Limbs at Ease he lies,What Creature dares provoke him to arise?Bless him, and be of happy Men the first,Curse him, and thou thy self shalt be accurst. He ceased. King Octa tho incensed, supprestHis Trouble and Displeasure in his Breast,And to the sorcerer, thus himself addrest. By solemn Execrations, to devoteThe Britons to Destruction, you were sought. But, you this impious Nation chuse to Bless,And all your Words presage their Arms success. Withdraw a second time, perhaps you'll findThe Gods, by your Enchantments more inclined. Perhaps some Errour might at first displease,A second Essay will the Powers appease. The sorcerer a second time retreats,And all his potent Charms with Care repeats. He added ev'ry poisonous Juice, and spellHe knew had force to shake the Realms of Hell. Merlin his impious Rites performed, returns,And acted by satanick Fury burns. All Hell within shook the Magician's Breast,But by a Power Divine straight dispossest;Th' affrighted Demons fled, and in their steadA pure Celestial spirit did succeed. Transports Divine, his lab'ring soul engage,And thus he spake, moved with Prophetick Rage. In vain with Divination, we assailThe Christian Arms, where all Enchantments fail. Our Curses by the powerful Breath of heaven,Back on our Heads, with fatal Force are driv'n. Those God has blest, no Guards nor Bulwarks need,Nor can their Arms, whom he has curst, succeed. Unchangeably he's on his Purpose bent,Nor do's he, like unstable Man, repent. The Christian Army will prevail, that said,Observing Octa's Fury rise, he fled. The King incensed, cried, curst Magician fly,spite of thy Charms, and thee, shall Victory,And Triumph, on the saxon Arms attend,Against such Troops what signs can ill portend?Thy impious Tongue Propitious heaven belies;And for the Britons forges Prophecies. Thy self of British Blood, the British Causestronger than Wrongs, or ev'n Religion draws. so oft poor slaves, who to a neighbr'ing stateFly for Protection from a Tyrants Hate,If he does War against those Neighbours wage,And with his Arms, upon their Frontiers rage. Joy at th' Oppressor's Conquests and success,Against their own Protector's, they express. Octa at this Defeat with Fury burned,And to his Army with his Lords returned. Amidst his Troops he rode, and thus he spoke,His Voice high raised their Courage to provoke. saxons, you now to certain Conquest go,To glean the Reliques of a ruined Foe. The Gods do loudly for your cause declare,And call you, but to finish their own War. Think on the Deeds by your great Nation doneThe Towns they took, their glorious Battels won,And the Rich Countries by their Arms o'er run,From this fair Island shall the Britons chase,From these sweet Fields, great Odin's warlike Race?From these sweet Fields, for which our Leaders fought,Which with the noblest saxon Blood were bought. shall we with ignominious Flight retreat,O'er the rough Main, to seek some milder seat?Or shall we back to our cold Region go,To hide in Caves, and dwell in Hills of snow?Can my victorious Friends the Britons dread,Who from your conquering Arms so oft have fled,A vanquished Nation, by an Exile led?Appear like saxons, add this Conquest more,To all th' immortal Laurels won before. Thus you'll the Grounds of lasting Empire lay,And still the Briton shall your Laws obey. Vain with success at sea, they draw their swords,And for Dominion strive with us, their Lords. Let now your Arms chastise their wanton Pride,And then in unmolested Peace abide. He said, and brandished high his threatning Launce,And springing forward, bids his Men advance. Now from the Hills th' embatteled saxon swarms,And covers all the Plain with hostile Arms. As when the great Commanders, Orders giveTo quit the straight Dominions of their Hive,The Bees pour out a numerous Colony;From their sweet Cells, the busie Youth on highWheel in the Air, and darken all the sky. While brazen Pans charm and compose their Heat,In some tall neighb'ring Tree they fix their seat. Thither th' unnumbered Vulgar straight resort,And clustring Crowds, surround their Monarch's Court. so thick the saxons on the Field appear,Following their Leader with an endless Rear. The gloomy Throngs look terrible from far,Disclosing slow, the horrid Face, of War. The thick Battalions move in dreadful Form,As lowring Clouds advance before a storm. so when the sea grown black, the hazy sky,And rising Winds, foretel a Tempest nigh. Th' experienced Mariners with hasty careFurl their spread sails, and for a storm prepare. straight in the black Horizon, to the skiesThe dusky Billows threat'ning Heads arise. Th' unnumbered Troops upon each others throng,And with a gloomy Aspect march along. Advancing, they their boundless Front extendO'er all the Main, and fearful Wreck portend. The saxon Host thus in its March appears,And where it came, thick Groves of bristling spears,Broad Iron Backs, and Breast-plates, brazen shields,Mail-Coats, and burnished Helms o'erspread the Fields. Chariots of War in Clouds of Dust advance,And tossing up their Foam, the thundring Coursers Prance. Their Army's Wings stretcht out, they to the FoesA long extended Ridge of War oppose. The British squadrons tho outnumbered far,Run boldly on the horrid Edge of War. To make their Front, the thin Battalions ran,But stretcht not equal to the saxon Van. 
        Both Armies thus, ranged in Battalia stood,And Death prepared her thirsty Jaws for Blood. From the Celestial Host, a glorious BandOf seraphs was detached by high Command. Hither the shining Warriours did repair,And drawn in long Array, stood in the Air. Their Blades divinely tempered flamed on high,And blazing shields inlighten all the sky;Impenetrable shields, drawn from the TowersOf heaven's high Ars'nal, filled with warlike stores. Th' Angelick Cuirassiers, in Armour shoneOf Adamant, from Rocks Empyreal hewn. High milk white Plumes, like snowy Clouds arise,From their bright Crests, and Nod against the skies. Rich Helmets, of Immortal beaten GoldAdorn their Heads, Brass of Etherial mouldRefined above, their joynted Gauntlets made;Brass, that the Teeth of Time can ne'er invade. Broad silver Belts richly embroidered o'er,Rare seraphs work, their shining shoulders boreAnd round them sky-died Purple scarfs they wore. Michael a Prince in heaven of first renown,Who, like a sun, high in his Chariot shone;This bright Detachment did in Chief Command,Charged to maintain strict Guard, and to withstandTh' Attempts, that might by Hellish Fiends be made,sent by their Prince the Christian to invade. While Lucifer on the white Mountain's Head,His black, Infernal Crew about him spread;With Malice, Rage, and Pride extended sateHigh on his dusky Throne, resolved to wait,And see, if this important eday's Event,Would answer with success, his curst intent. In glitt'ring Arms the dazling Prince appears,Before his Troops, the saxon sees, and fears. His Helm of polished steel braced round his Head,Did o'er the Field, a glorious Terrour spread. Bright stones, and high raised Needle Work adornThe shining Belt across his shoulders worn. His fatal sword. the Bane of Gothick Pride,With fearful Grace hung by his warlike side. Odar the Neustrian of this famous BladeInured to Victory, a Present madeTo Arthur, when from Albion first he came,To Odar's Camp, to win Heroick Fame. Lodar did with this Gift King Odar grace,A valiant Hero of the Neustrian Race. His radiant shield, of Brass its outmost Fold,Th' inmost tempered steel, the midst of Gold,Was the rare Work of Lycon's skilful Toil,From which unpeirced, the sharpest Darts recoil. Bright, like a sun, it did fierce Glory dart,Where might be seen pourtraied with wondrous Art,strong Towns besieged, and famous Battels won,And great Exploits by ancient Heros done;Who to defend their Country, bravely fought,By Men inspired, in sacred Volumes wrote. Here th' Israelites, kind heaven's peculiar Care,Their famous Gen'ral Ioshua leads to War. The Rocky Desart past with wondrous Toil,With Marches worn, and heavy with the spoilFrom vanquished Baashan and King sihon won,Where their illustrious Triumphs first begun,Advance their Ensigns, Canaan to invade,Ripe by their full grown sins for Conquest made. To Iordan's streams they come, straight to his HeadHis Waves rolled back, obsequious Iordan fled. The naked Channel shews his sandy Face,And gives the Fav'rite Nation leave to pass. Th' astonished Canaanites, like Iordan, fly,And weep to see their Guardian River dry. Here valiant Gideon, with his Troop by Night,Marched out t' attack the haughty Midianite. 
        The Foe, like Locusts, numberless was pouredAround the Vale, and all its Fruits devoured. But dreading Gideon's Arms, the spoilers fly,And by his sword, and by their own, they die. King Zeba, and Zalmunna, with a throngOf Captive Princes, draw their Chains along. Here in the plain, stretcht like some spacious Wood,In long Array, the thronged Philistines stood. Goliah issuing from their opening Files,Of Bulk stupendous, hideous with the spoilsOf yellow Lyons slain, and shaggy Bears,Towring before their shouting Host, appears. With haughty Air, the wondrous Figure strode,His sword his Trust, and his right Hand his God. Beneath his Weight the Vally seemed to shake,But his pale Foes did more than seem to quakeGnashing his Teeth the grinning Monster stood,Himself an Army, and his spear a Wood. sufficient stores whole Mines could scarcely yield,For his wide Cuirass, and prodigious shield. Where Figures pourtraied of fierce Monsters shone,But none so fierce, and monstrous as his own. High in the Clouds his brazen Helm did showLike some vast Temple's gilded Cupilo. 
        His mighty Legs, that brazen Boots embraced,Tall Pillars seemed, with Corinth Mettal cased. Thus armed he stood, and by his Mein did seemTo curse aloud, to threaten and blaspheme. His beck'ning Hand held proudly up, invitesTo combate, all the trembling Hebrew Knights. Tho vast of Bulk he bigger swells with Pride,He curst their Army, and their Gods defied. Here, God-like David, in the flowry BloomOf Youth, and Beauty, brings the Monster's Doom. To kindle Love, or Pity fitter far,Then the rough Passions, that attend on War. And likelier by his Youth's engaging CharmsTo wound the Anakite, then with his Arms. Yet bravely he embraced th' unequal War,And scorned his Rage that curst him from afar. The fatal stone by the young Hero flung,Cut thro' the Air, and sure of Triumph sung. It pierced the Cyclops Head, his Carcass fellswift to the Ground, his soul, as swift to Hell. Faln on his Face, he bites the trembling Ground. And Brains, and Gore break thro' the gaping Wound. Wallowing he lay a vast extended Load,Like a great Island, in a sea of Blood. His gastly Eye-balls strive with parting Light,And swim, and roll into eternal Night. Here saul received the charming conquering Boy,The Captains blushed for shame, and wept for Joy. His Brothers grieved to see the glorious Day,Prompted with Pride, and Envy shrunk away. Here Iudah's Daughter flowry Garlands bring,They crown young David, and presage him King. In songs and Dances they his Deeds proclaim,And saul's is lessened, to advance his Fame. Here mighty sampson, hot with Martial Rage,A numerous Army does alone engage. His sword high waved, reeking in sweat and Blood,O'er slaughtered Heaps, th' invading Conquerour strodeHis fatal Arms, his Foes no longer bear,But their whole Host flies from his single spear. Confusedly o'er the Field lay spread about,Wide Ruin, spoils, and ignominious Rout. Here valiant David's Troops victorious come,From their Assyrian Expedition home. Vast were the spoils, that from the glorious DayWon on Damascus's Plains, they bore away. King Hadadezer's Arms in Triumph born,And Purple Robes by their soft Princes worn,And sparkling Gems, that did their Ears adorn. Rich Collars, Chains, and blazing shields of Gold,Vast silver Bowls, that richer Metal hold. High gilded Dishes, graven or embossed,Treasure immense, that syria had engrossed. Purple Pavilions once in lofty Rows,And Crimson Beds, where Monarchs did repose. Unnumbered Camels, laden and opprest,With all th' Luxury of the wanton East,Beneath the Booty groaned along the Road,Themselves a Prey, as was their precious Load. Here ran gilt Chariots drawn by generous steeds,such as the noble soil of Asia breeds. Here Royal Captives, and chained Lords appear,And vulgar slaves, prest with an endless Reer. Here the great Constantine of British Race,O'er Tyber's Bridge, does fierce Maxentius chase. With Roman Blood the swelling Rivers died,And Helms, and shields roll down the Crimsom Tyde. spears, broken Armour, Men, and Coursers slain,The streams encumber, and the Flood detain. Great Constantine in glitt'ring Armour shines,And pressing on, breaks thro' the Roman Lines. Maxentius Hopes are blasted in the Bloom,He flies, and opens wide the Gates of Rome,
        To the Victorious Christian, and his God,Where for a while, he made his blest abode. "
"12","Prince Arthur. BOOK VIII. THus in resplendent Arms Prince Arthur shines,Darting bright Terrour thro' the saxon Lines. All at his fearful Presence were amazed,And on the glorious Foe with Wonder gazed. Confusion seized them, and a chilling DampWent to their Hearts thro' all the trembling Camp. And now the vaulted sky rings with the NoiseOf souldiers shoutings, and shrill Trumpets Voice. The British Prince waving his flaming Blade,The saxon's strong Battalions did invade. First Baldred fell a bold and daring Knight,That rushing forward did his Fate invite. The Javelin thro' his shield of treble Hide,And Coat of Mail, pierced deep into his side. Eska the second Triumph did afford,His Head strook off by Arthur's conquering sword. Next groveling on the Ground great Ina lies,And the brave Orla of stupendous size. Whose Clubs like that Alcides used to weild,Laid whole Brigades, on Heaps upon the Field. Neither their Arms, nor stature, nor Descent,From mighty Osca could their Fate prevent. As Pharo boasted loud, and threatned Death,The Javelin pierced his Throat, and stoped his Breath. Kinullar next the conquering Prince withstood,A valiant Captain, and of noble Blood. Resisted by his shield the saxon's spearFlew off, and passed obliquely thro' the Air. Here on the Prince Cissa exclaiming loud,Rushed in, and presed him with a numerous Crowd. Thick showers of Javelins with a mighty sound,Like storms of Hail, from his bright shield rebound. The Prince enraged caught up his spear in hast,Which he at Cissa with such Fury castIt pierced his famous Buckler's seventh Fold,And his Rich Coat dawbed thick with pond'rous Gold. Then deep between the Paps the Weapon went,And its last Force in his warm Bosom spent. Flat on his Face the Bleeding saxon lies,And rat'ling in his Throat stretcht out, and dies. Mollo rushed in and with his hand did wrestThe bloody Weapon from his Brother's Breast,And boldly to attack the Prince advanced,But from his shield th' unprosperous Weapon glanced. The Prince's spear thro' Mollo's shield of BrassThro' His Habergion, and his Breast did pass. Mollo of sense bereaved fell to the Ground,And spewed black Blood, both for his Mouth and Wound,striving th' invading Hero to repel,Alcinor, Peda, and Darontes fell,Three Men of wondrous strength and warlike Fame,Who from the farthest snows of scythia came;Descended all from Otha's noble Line,Whose glorious Deeds in saxon Records shine. He was victorious Odin's constant Friend,And all his Toils, and Conquests did attend,Then Cerdic with his Troops the Prince withstands,sustained by sebert, and th' East saxon Bands. Now these, now those, the British Prince attack,And press on every side, to force him back. As when two adverse Hurricanes arise,Must'ring their stormy Forces in the skies. Of equal Fury, and of equal Force,Against each other bend their rapid Course. The Clouds their Lines extend in black Array,And Front to Front a fearful War display. Exploded Flames against each other fly,And fiery Arches Vault th' inlightened sky. Conflicting Billows, against Billows dash,Thunder 'gainst Thunder roars, Lightnings 'gainst Lightnings flash. Nor Flames, nor Winds, nor Waves, nor Clouds will yield,But equal strength maintains a doubtful Field. Britons and saxons thus in Battel strove,And neither from their Ground the Foe remove. Then Valiant Cadwal threat'ning from afarHigh in his Chariot, plunged into the War. His strong, extended Arm his Javelin flung;Cutting the Air, the hissing Weapon sung. Falling on Kingills shield it pierced the HideOf treble Fold, and entered deep his side. Fainting and stagg'ring Kingill backwards reeledThen fell with sounding Arms upon the Field. Gasping he lay, and from his ghastly Wound,His Crimson Life ebbed out upon the Ground. And next his fatal shaft at Bertac flewWith mighty Force, and pierced his Breastplate thro'. The secret springs of Life the pointed Dart. Broke open, and transfixt his generous Heart. His Wound from gaping Channels inward bled,And on his shoulder hung his lolling Head. He fell, and shivering gasped his latest Breath,And fainting sunk into the Arms of Death:A noble Youth worthy of milder Fate,But Death's blind stroaks distinguish not the great. At last the saxon Troops in Throngs surround,The valiant King, Thus far with Conquest crowned. Thick showers of Darts from every side invade,And in his shield a bristling Harvest staid. Th' undaunted Hero long their Force sustained,And held at Bay; th' unequal War maintained:Like a chafed Boar that in a sheltring Wood,The clam'rous Dogs surround King Cadwall stood. A noble Rage did in his Breast arise,And streaks of Fire break from his burning Eyes. so when by Night th' Islandian Ocean roars,And rolls its angry Waters to the shores. Flashes of Light, and fiery Lustre glanceFrom raging Waves, that in bright Troops advance. With his refulgent sword the Warriour flew,Upon the Crowd, and cut his Passage thro'. soga and Kenrick from the Hilly LandWhere sorbiodunum's lofty Castles stand;Two constant Friends, whom Fate could not divide,Together by the Britons Weapon died. Then Redburg Alfry and Theodrick fell,striving in vain the Victor to repell. Great Numbers more he slew, whose vulgar NameTo those, in after Ages never came. As a high Rock, which the vast Ocean laves,Exposed to stormy Winds, and raging Waves,On its fixt Base unshaken does defyTh' united Fury of the seas, and sky. so 'midst surrounding Foes, brave Cadwall stood,About him flowed a sea of Hostile Blood. He slew Rovennar, with his mighty sword,And saradan a great west saxon Lord. Valiant Elmunor, to his Country dear,And Osith died, by his projected spear. Octa enraged to see the numerous spoilsRound Cadwall spread, sprung thro' the thronging Files. Rushing with Fury on, and threatning highHe thus aloud, did to the Briton cry. Cadwall on me let all your Force be spent,Hither be all your pointed Javelins sent. Here see a Foe that will your Pride abate,Or in the glorious Combate meet his Fate:At this his massy spear with Vigour sent,Thro' valiant Cadwalls shining Buckler went. Thro' all the Plates of Brass, and all the PliesOf thick Bull's Hide, th' impetuous Weapon flies. Which bruised his Thigh, and springing from his VeinsA crimson stream his polished Armour stains. Cadwall incensed his spear at Octa flung,Which in his tempered shield arrested hung. A second hissing Weapon Octa cast,Which th' interposing Buckler never past. But glancing on the steel, away it flewAnd with an oblique stroke, Idwallo slew. Then Cadwall chafed, exerting all his Force,His second sends, with unresisted Course. Thro' Octa's brazen shield it Passage found,Inflicting on his side, a painful Wound. Their missive VVeapons spent with equal Chance,To closer Fight the Combatants advance. Equal in strength, alike in Combate brave,Their swords on high, like circ'ling Flames they wave. Both traversing the Ground for Fight prepare,And with Heroic Ardor meet the War. And Octa first discharged a noble strokeOn Cadwalls Crest, which thro' his Helmet broke:Cadwall amazed, recoyled, and backwards reeled,And scarce his spear his tott'ring Limbs upheld. A loud Applause rang thro' the shouting Host;The Britons raged, and thought their Hero lost;But he recov'ring from th' amazing Blow,Collects his strength to meet the insulting Foe. His brandished Blade fell with prodigious sway,And thro' the yielding Cuirasse, forced its Way. The gaping Wound poured out a Vital Tyde,And Crimson streams his burnished Armour died. Octa his wounded Body wreaths in Pain,And viewing on his Limbs the Bloody stain,With angry Eyes calls back his Life again. And then assaults the Foe with doubled Rage,Who meets his Arms, as eager to engage. Fresh strokes, fresh Wounds, they give on either side,While Vict'ry does for neither sword decide. VVeak with their VVounds, and with bruised Armour painedAn equal, noble Combate they maintained. Feeble and Breathless still they keep the Field,Unable more their blunted Arms to wield. And now the Throng rushed in, the Combat doneBy neither Hero lost, by neither won. And rending with their shouts the tortured Air,Back to their Files, the Combatants they bear. so when two valiant Cocks in Albion bred,That from th' insulting Conquerour never fled. A Match in strength, in Courage, and in Age,And with keen Weapons armed alike Engage;Each other they assault with furious Beaks,And their trimed Plumes distain with bloody streaks. Each nimble Warriour from the Pavement bounds,And winged with Death, their Heels deal ghastly Wounds. By turns they take, by turns fierce strokes they give,And with like Hopes and Fears, for Conquest strive. Both obstinate maintain the Bloody Field,Both can in Combat dye, but neither yield. Till with their bleeding Wounds grown weak and faint,And choaked with flowing Gore they gasp, and pant. Disabled on the Crimson Floor they ly,Both Honour win, but neither Victory. Then Morogan, his Javelin in his Hand,Charged the fierce Troops where Ella did Command. Wigmunda, first his deadly Weapon felt,Who on the flowry Banks of Oza dwelt,Faln on the ground, the saxon groaned aloud,And dying, lay deformed with Dust and Blood. Next Ethelbright he slew, the Javelin past,Thro' the brave Leader's Hand, where sticking fastHe from the Battel fled, and thro' the throngComplaining loud, trailed his huge spear along. To fight the Briton, Thedred did advanceAnd in his Buckler broke his pondrous Lance. High in the Air the scattered pieces flew,When Morogan, his ample Fauchion drew;He mist the mighty stroke aimed at his Crest,But cleft his shoulder down into his Chest:Thro' the prodigious Wound, a sea of Bloodspouts from his Veins, and down his Armour flowed,Weltring in Gore, upon the Ground he stretcht,And his last Breath in thick Convulsions fetcht. Next he his spear at great Merthellan throws,Thro' Breast, and Back, the deadly Weapon goes. Then warlike Ella, with excessive RageAll fired, advanced the Briton to engage. As two chafed Lyons on a Lybian Plain,Contending which shall o'er the Desart reign,With raging Eyes, and fierce erected Hair,scowr o'er the sands, to meet the horrid War;so furious Ella, and great Morogan,
        Eager of Conquest, to the Combat ran. The saxon first his massy Javelin flung,With the vast stroke, the Briton's Target rung,The Tempered steel the Weapon did repel,Which flew aside, and at a Distance fell. The Briton next, did his bright Javelin throw,Ella his Head inclined, eludes the Blow. Ella with all his Might his second cast,Which mist, but stroke the Plume off, as it pastThe Briton stoped, and lifted from the FieldA pond'rous stone, which both his Hands did weild,so vast, that two in our degenerate Days,Tho Men of strength, the like can scarcely raise;With all his strength he throws the craggy stone,Which thro' King Ella's Leg-piece, crushed the Bone. The wounded Warriour fell upon the Plain,Adda advanced, the Conquerour to sustain;While Gomel with his Men did Ella bearFrom the hot Place of Action, to the Rear,Where Charioteer, and steeds, and Chariot stay,Waiting his coming from the Bloody Day. Mean time great Morogan, had Adda slain,The spear had thro' his Forehead peirced his Brain. Biting the Ground, th' expiring saxon lies,And Death's unwelcome shade o'erspreads his Eyes. And with like Courage, and with like success,The brave Prince Conan did the saxons press,Which Osred led, great Numbers he destroied,Whose putrid Blood, the slipp'ry Field annoied. sefred, Carantes, Molinoc he slew,And Ethelfrid, in Arms surpassed by few. Oswy, and Bassa, all of warlike Fame,And many more, of unrecorded Name. Thus Valiant Conan, triumphed in the Field,And all he met, did to his Courage yield. Until a sculking, unknown hand, at lastDid unperceived, a pointed Javelin cast:Deep in his Arm, th' inglorious Weapon goes,His Wound the Blood upon his Armour shows,He drew the steel out, from his bleeding Veins,And from the Field, retired in tort'ring Pains. Mean time, out-numbered in another part,Macor's Danmonian Troops began to start. Macor to stop their ignominious Flight,And give them spirit to renew the Fight;Now sharp Reproaches used, and bitter Threats,And now with Prayers he earnestly intreats. Enraged, ashamed, and fearing open Rout,Exclaiming loud, he wildly flew about. He stays them with his Hands, and Voice, and Eyes,And to confirm their sinking Courage, cries,Whither will my Danmonians madly run,And leave behind a Vict'ry almost won?What pannick Fear does my brave Friends invade?Till now, you never knew to be afraid. Think on the Brav'ry you have always shown,And Laurels you and your great Fathers won. By their great Deeds, and yours, by Cador's Name,By all my Hopes and yours which are the same. By the Danmonian Fame, I all conjureTrust not to Flight, your Arms must you secure. Who will maintain their Ground, if you recoil?Thus do you mean to guard your Native soil?To what new seats will you from Albion fly?Or will you in the Rocks and Mountains ly?Britons return from your inglorious Flight,Rally your Forces, and renew the Fight. To safety, and to Fame the way I'll show,see, here it lies, across the thickest Foe. He said, and straight amidst the Troops he flew,Osher the first he met, the first he slew. He pierced his Belly thro' the yielding shield,And out his Bowels gushed upon the Field. To aid his Friend, constant Eballan flies,But wounded by the Briton, with him dies. Then while Adulphas, Bertham's Offspring stands,Poising a pondrous stone in both his Hands,The mighty Fragment of a craggy Rock,And aimed at Macor's Head, a deadly stroke. Thro' his pierced side the Javelin made its Way,And buried, in his bleeding Liver lay. Then you brave Youths, Egbert, and Alopas,
        Both noble Branches of great Horsa's Race,Their Age the same, the same their youthful Charms,Fell in the British Fields by Macor's Arms. This 'twixt the Ribs received the fatal Dart,Where transverse Bounds the Breast and Belly part. Lopt from the shoulder with a fearful Wound,T' other's Right Arm lay quivering on the Ground. Now the Danmonians who began to run,seeing the Wonders by their Leader done,With shame and generous Indignation burn,And to the War with doubled Rage return. Then Macor let his spear at Redwall flyIn his bright Chariot, passing swiftly by. It passed his shield, and went into his Reins,A Purple Flood, springs from his wounded Veins,And mixt with Dust, the fervid Wheels detains. Projected headlong on the Ground he lay,Fetched a deep Groan, and gasped his Life away. With like success his Men no more afraid,Of saxon Arms, their thickest Files invade. so when dissolved by summer Rays, the snowDo's down the sides of Alpine Mountains flow,Below the several Rills, and Currents joyn,And different streams in one great Flood combine. Then do's the Deluge rear its foaming Head,O'er-flow the Banks, and o'er the Meadows spread. No lofty Mounds arrest th' insulting Tide,But o'er the flowry Vale, the Waves triumphant ride,so the Danmonian scattered Troops unite,And with associate Arms, revive the Fight. Here to restrain Macor's victorious Course,Bartha, opposed a fresh collected Force. From his strong Arm his singing Javelin flew,And passing thro' his Neck Guitardan slew. He hurled his Ball of Iron at the HeadOf stout Gomallador, and struck him dead. His Helm in Pieces flew, his Bones were crashed. And from his scull his Blood and Brains were dashed. Macor incensed, advances to the Fight,And praied to heaven, to guide his Weapon right. Nor did he pray in vain, th' unerring DartTransfixt his Breast, and sunk into his Heart. strong Bartha fell, the Blood his Armour stains,And shivering Death crept cold along his Veins. But to revenge so great a Captain's Fall,Lothar aloud does on his saxons call. First Lodoic he slew, who stood the shock,Of War before unshaken as a Rock. strong Mandubrace, of whom the Britons tellsuch mighty Deeds, by the brave saxon fell. Beauteous Codunan the silurians Pride,And warlike Hanomer together died. Their Leaders brave alike, alike enragedThe Britons, and the saxon close engagedAn obstinate, and bloody Fight maintain,And Heaps of Dead, ly thick upon the Plain. Dark Clouds of Dust thro' th' airy Region fly,And warlike Noise bounds from the vaulted sky. Helms mixt with Helms, and Arms with Arms uniteTheir bright Reflexion, to oppress the sight. Now Man at Man, squadrons at squadrons rush,And Files at Files with spears protended push. swords clash with swords, Bucklers on Bucklers bray,And thro' the Field a horrid Din convey. slaughter and Death in dreadful Pomp appear,And Brains, and Gore, the slippery Field besmear:so when two adverse Tides their Waves advance,With equal Fury, and with equal Chance;The foaming Forces, doubtful Fight maintain,Where both by Turns loose, what by Turns they gain. On this side now retreats the vanquished Tide,And on its back th' insulting Billows ride. Rallying its roaring Troops with swift Career,It soon returns, and reassumes the VVar. The Conquerour before is forced to yield,And rolling back its Waves deserts the Field. Alternate Conquest, and alternate Flight,Between the Foes prolong a doubtful Fight. so thick the Troops, so fast and close were prest,The wedged Batalions standing Breast to Breast,They scarce have space their Hands or Arms to moveBut like contending Waves each other shove. Here Macor urges, presses, and invades,Here Lothur stops him with his strong Brigades. Equal in Arms, in Beauty, and in Age,But not allowed each other to engage,On both the valiant Youths a different Fate,From a far greater Foe does shortly wait. King Cerdick then advanced exclaiming loudAnd with his rapid Chariot cuts the Crowd. And to the Troops that stopt his way, he criedOpen to right and left, your Ranks divide,Macor and I this Contest will decide. Nor did the saxon Troops his Will oppose,But open, and an Ample space disclose. Then leaping to the Ground his pondrous Oak,Pointed with polished steel, he threatning shook. At such a sight th' amazed Danmonians start,And their chill Blood congealed about their Heart. Macor undaunted, traverses the Ground,And at the saxon aims a fatal Wound. Then thro' the Air his spear projected flew,And from its sheath his slaming sword he drew. The Buckler's Brims the glancing Weapons razedAnd flying off, on the right shoulder grazed. Then Cerdick's Javelin poised, and aimed with Care,Flew from his Arm, and hissing cut the Air. Who cried out as it went, go swiftly fly,And the hard Metal of his Armour try. While Cerdick thus insults th' impetuous Oak,Thro' Buckler, Coat of Mail and Cuirass broke,And pierced his Breast where the deep springs abide,Whence Life leaps out upon its circ'ling Tide. The Vital streams thro' his bruised Armour spout,While he in vain wrests the warm Weapon out. After the parting Dart, together crowdFrom the wide Wound, his soul, and Life, and Blood. He fell, his Arms upon his Armour rung,And Death in cold Embraces round him clung. Thus fell the brave Danmonian who had slain,such Numbers piled on Heaps upon the Plain. His Friends with sighs, and Tears upon a sheild,Bear his pale Corps off from the bloody Field. Cerdick his Weapon warm with Macor's Blood,Advanced with Fury not to be withstood. With his drawn sword he does the Foe invade,And midst their Ranks prodigious Havock made. The Britons all enraged at Macor's Fall,With showers of Darts the raging saxon gaul. On every side the Monarch they assail,With thick Brigades, but cannot yet prevail. As when a mighty stag, that long had stood,The unmolested Monarch of the Wood,safe in its Coverts, and protecting shade,Against the Foe, that would his Peace invade:If at an ancient Oak he stands at lastAt Bay, by furious Dogs too closely chased;Fearless he looks and to his clam'rous Foes,Does his thick Grove of Native Arms opposeThe Dogs with distant Cries infest the Ears,And from a far the Huntsmen cast their spears. None daring to approach the generous Beast,Project aloof their Darts against his Breast,Thus Cerdick stood, nor dared the boldest Knight,Advance to undertake a closer Fight. They cast their Darts at distance, and from farshower on his Brazen shield a ratling War. With their loud Cries the ambient Air they rend,And raging, all their missive Weapons, spend. Mean time around, King Cerdick's Jav'lins flew,And Arthurs Men, with vast Destruction slew. Cadwan he killed, whose Arms great Fame had won,And Vortiger great Ganumara's son. Then Vogan fell and Ottocar who traceTheir high Descent from Hoel's ancient Race. Great Numbers died where the chafed saxon flew,And with his sword cut his wide Passage thro'so when a generous Bull for Clowns Delight,stands with his Line restrained, prepared for Fight. Hearing the Youths loud Clamours, and the Rage,Of barking Mastives eager to engage. He snuffs the Air, and paws the trembling Ground,Views all the Ring, and proudly walks it round. Defiance lowring on his brinded Brows,Around disdainful Looks, the grisly Warriour throws. His haughty Head inclined with easie scorn,Th' invading Foe high in the Air is born,Tost from the Combatant's victorious Horn. Raised to the Clouds, the sprawling Mastives fly,And add new Monsters to th' affrighted sky. The clam'rous Youth, to aid each other call,On their broad Backs to break their Fav'rite's fall. some stretcht out on the Field lie dead and someDragging their Entrails on, run howling Home. But if at last on all sides he's engaged,By fresh and fiercer Foes, strait all enragedHe flies about, some with his Horns He gores,some strikes, and moved with Indignation roars. With Disproportioned Numbers prest at length,He breaks his Chain collecting all his strength. Then Dogs and Masters scared promiscuous fly,And fal'n in Heaps, the pale spectators ly. He walks in Triumph, nods his conquering Head,And proudly views the spoils about him spread. Hyalca fell, a Lord of Neustrian Birth,struggling with Death, he bites the hostile Earth. Rivollan dies, the brave Armorican,
        Who swifter than a driving Tempest ran. Mador, not daring Cerdick to engageFled from his Post to scape the Conquerors Rage. Cerdick pursued him close, exclaiming loud,And to o'ertake him, breaks th' opposing Crowd. As when a Lyon on the Mountains spies,A well grown stag, his furious Bristles rise,And yawning horribly, with Hunger prest,Away he flies to tear the trembling Beast. He leaps upon him with his dreadful Paws,And buries in his sides his fearful Jaws. so raging Cerdick flew faln Mador dies,And everlasting Night shuts up his Eyes. Ludvalla, from the high silurian HillsEldubert slew, Poel Edella kills,Chelrick Adarc, Tudor pierced Alwy thro',Oswoll Pricarden, Oven Kensey slew. Bladoc kills Athelmar in single FightOf goodly stature, and a valiant Knight. Edwin gave Vortimer his fatal Wound,Who from his steed, fell headlong to the Ground,Lovellines Blood the great Barnulfa spillsKentwin Rodollan, Pricel Ussa kills. Now equal Ruin raged on either side,And Vict'ry mutual Favours did divide,Flowing, and Ebbing with an equal Tide. With like success, by turns the doubtful FieldThe Victors and the vanquished, win and yield. such was the bloody Labour of the Day,And in such even scales their Fortune lay. Now certain Fame had reached Prince Arthur's Ear,That his loved Macor died by Cerdick's spear. No Tydings more his Fury could provoke,Or strike into his Breast a deeper stroke. His Looks revealed his Wound, and Grief, and Rage,His conquering Arms in deep Revenge engage. With his refulgent sword he hewed his way,Like grass mown down the slaughtered saxons lay. His stroaks are all as sure, as those of Fate,And Death and Vict'ry on his Progress wait. His Arms the Field with vast Destruction clear. Wide Lanes made by his sword and spatious Voids appear. Thro' their thick Ranks the raging Tempest flies,And fearful Ruin all around him lies. In vain his fatal Javelin never flew,Ebissa, Edgar, Ethelburg he slew. And Ethelwoll who fled the Conquerors sight,But the swift Dart o'er took him in his Flight. His deadly spear at Kenfred was designed,Who stooping down the hissing Death declined. Then at the Conq'rour's Feet he prostrate falls,And in sad Accents for Compassion calls. spare, God-like Briton, and let Kenfred live,Me to my Father and my Children give. Treasures immense of silver and of Gold,My Iron Chests, and buried Coffers hold. These Riches from the sun, so long concealedshall to discharge my Ransome be revealed. Mine's but a single Life, if that be spared,It cant the Progress of your Arms retard,On this does not depend your Empire's Fate,Nor can my Life or Death affect your state,He said to whom the British Prince replied,The silver and the Gold your Cellars hide,You to your sons and Daughters must bequeath,Expect your self, the present stroke of Death. That said, he took his Helmet by the Crest,And drawing back his Head, into his BreastUp to the Hilts, he plunged his fatal sword,And from the Wound a crimson River poured. Colmar hard by Odin's and Frea's Priest,Distinguished by his Dress, from all the rest,And by the Garland round his Temples known,In glitt'ring Arms, and splendid Garments shone. Up flew his Heels while from the Field he fled,Nazaleod set his Foot, upon his Head,And stroke into the Ground quite thro' his BreastHis pointed spear, and his rich spoils possest. Then Arthur with his spear, pierced Rufa thro',Then Osmor, seward Ethellar he flewOsa Beorno, Kendred, Ediswall,Penda, Kenelmar, Osbert, Ethelbal. Pale Oswald fled, the Conq'rour to prevent,But thro' his Back the swifter Javelin went. His flaming sword, did ne'er in vain descendBut sure Destruction did its sway attend. The reeking Conquerour in Triumph reigned,Glutted with slaughter, and with Blood distained. Th' unnumbered Dead, that round the Briton layMore then their living Troops, obstruct his way. To reach their Men, that from his Fury fled,He climbs their slaughtered piles, and scales the Dead. sometimes the saxons with new Fury burn,And rallying squadrons to the War return:They pour around the Prince their numerous swarms,And strive to crush him with unequal Arms. As when Tempestuous storms o'erspread the skies,In whose dark Bowels in born Thunder lies. The watry Vapours numberless conspire,To smother, and oppress th' imprisoned Fire. Which thus collected gathers greater Force,Breaks out in Flames, and with impetuous CourseFrom the Cloud's gaping Womb in Light'nings flies,Flashing in ruddy streaks, along the skies. so Arthur's flaming sword cuts thro' the Cloud,Around him spread, and rends th' opposing Crowd. With daz'ling Arms, he flies upon the Foe,Flashes amidst the throngs, and terribly Thunders thro'. Authum and Alfrid, with fresh Troops sustain,Their stagg'ring squadrons, and the War maintain,To these Prince Arthur winged with Fury flew,And first stout Alfrid with his spear he slew. Thro the left Groin, the Weapon made its Way,And stretcht along the Ground, the bleeding saxon lay. At Authum's Crest he dealt a furious stroke,The saxon tottered at th' amazing shock,And fell upon his Knee, and while he praiedAnd for his Life would many Things have said,His severed Head off, from his shoulder flies,And bounded on the Field, his Body liesAt a great Distance, quivering on the Ground,And streams of Blood spring from his ghastly Wound. As when the summers soultry Heats draw forth,Th' exhaling Moisture from the thirsty Earth,When scorching Rays the gaping Plains have fried,And from their Banks contracted streams subside. If then a Fire invades a spaeious Wood,Where Ancient Oaks have long securely stood;The conquering Flames advance with lawless Power,And with contagious Heat the Trees devour. The spreading Burning lays the Forrest waste,And sooty spoils lie smoaking where it past. so Arthur with resistless Rage around,Destroys and loads with slaughtered Heaps the Ground. Next did the Prince at bold Edburga aim,Who from the fertile Banks of Abum camePrince Unna's son to vast Possessions born,Broad Flowers of Gold his shining Coat adorn,The piercing steel deep in his Bosom sunk,And Life's pure stream at the warm Fountain drunk,His Arms did next valiant Titullan meet,Who fell and quivered at the Conquerour's Feet. Osrick and beauteous Hengist next appear,The first his Fauchion slew, the last his spear. Next stout Eldanor did his Fate provoke,And off his Head flew, at a single stroke. And next he threw at Labert, as he fledThe Weapon struck him, as he turned his Head. In Gore and Brains the glitt'ring Javelin reeks,And from his Veins a Purple Torrent breaks. Mean time King Cerdic did around destroy,And with thick Deaths his massy Fauchion cloy. Him from afar the British Hero spies,And winged with Fury to assault him flies. Cerdic mean time undaunted did appear,And forward steped, shaking his dreadful spear. Like one of Anak's mighty sons he stalked,Or some tall Oak, that after Orpheus walked. Fixt like a vast Colossus by his Weight,He stood, expecting his approaching Fate. Lowring, like rising Tempests from a far,He rages, and invites th' advanc'ing War. Now the Britannic Hero did appear,Within the Reach of his prodigious spear. King Cerdic curst, and by his Gods defiedThe Briton, and aloud to Odin cried;The glitt'ring Arms, by this gay Robber worn,Great Odin soon thy Temple shall adorn. Assist great Founder of our state the DartI cast, and guide it to his impious Heart. Then from his vig'rous Arm his massy spearProjected sung, and hissed along the Air. Off from the tempered shield the Weapon flew,Wounded Glendoran, and Alantor flew. Then his long spear the pious Briton cast,Th' impetuous steel thro' all the Thickness pastOf Brazen Plates, rowled Linnen, tough Bulls Hide,And entring deep, did in his Groin abide. The fainting saxon fell upon his Knees,Pained with his ghastly Wound, and trembling feesThe Conquering Prince advancing to asswage,By striking off his Head, his veng'ful Rage. Here the brave Lothar that had Wonders done,And by his Arms Immortal Praises won,For thro' the Host, the loud Applauses rungOf mighty Deeds atchieved by one so young. Transported with his pious Care, to bringAssistance to his Uncle, and his King;spured his hot Courser on, and forwards prestOff'ring to Arthur's Arms; his valiant Breast. He bravely undertook th' unequal Foe,To ward from Cerdic's Head, the fatal Blow. Then his long spear he threw, with Manly Force,But Arthur's Buckler stoped th' impetuous Course. Th' applauding saxons gave a shout to seeThe Noble Youth's excessive Bravery. But to his Prince's Aid in vain he flies,Who by his former Wound expiring lies,And everlasting sleep shuts up his Eyes. But then the British Hero's Javelin fledAt Lothar, but it pierced his Courser's Head. Raised in the Air upright, the gen'rous Beast,Gathered his shiv'ring Feet up to his Breast,Then springing strook them out, and stagg'ring roundFell head-long with his Rider to the Ground. A mighty Groan the dying Courser fetcht,And on the Ground a breathless Carcass stretcht. And here Immortal Elda shall my VerseThy unexampled Deed of Love reherse. Love which will universal Wonder raise,And scarcely find Belief in future Days. For whilst the British Hero steped with speed,To take off, with his Fauchion, Lothar's Head,Who with his steed opprest, and wounded lies,Fair Elda rushed between, and thus she cries,Before your fatal sword takes Lothar's Life,Victorious Prince, hear his unhappy Wife. Faln on her Knees she did her Helm unlace,And shewed the charming Beauties of her Face. The blooming Looks of spring, and lovely RedOf opening Roses on her Cheeks were spread. Her Eyes, that sparkled like the stars above,Appeared both th' Armory, and Throne of Love. Where thousands of alluring Graces wait,And mingling Charms form Love's triumphal state. Bright Ethelina her, and all excelled,she the next Place in Beauty's Empire held. Nor did her Looks, less Admiration move,While mild Confusion, sorrow, Fear and Love,With Beauteous Conflict, for the Vict'ry strove. A shower of Tears flowed down her lovely Face,Which from her Grief, received yet sweeter Grace. At the great Conq'rour's feet she threw her Charms,And lifting up to heaven, her snowy ArmsAloud she spoke, a wretched Woman's PrayerGreat Briton here, and my dear Lothar spare. since first his Bride within his Arms I lay,scarce two full Golden Months are stoln away,Which in Love's Calendar scarce make a Day. With Prayers, and Tears, and tender Words I strove,And all th' ingaging Arts of mournful Love;To keep him from the Dangers of the Field,And when th' obdurate Man refused to yield,About him my despairing Arms I flung,And on his Neck, o'erwhelmed with Grief I hung. I then conjured him, to avoid with CareYour fatal Arms, so much renowned in War. Away he goes, and as he said, adieu,He touched my Life, and my stretcht Heart-strings drew. For still I feared that the heroic FireAnd thirst of Fame, that did his soul inspire,Would make him think no Dangers were too great,Till rushing on your Arms, he urged his Fate. My conscious Fears, this sad Event presagedIf e'er with you, in Combate he engaged. Therefore in Arms I did my Limbs disguise,And undertook this dang'rous Enterprize,That if he rashly sought, so great a Foe,I might between him, and your fatal Blow,My Bosom interpose, and in my HeartTo save his dearer Life, receive the Dart. Or if Occasion were, to intercede,As now I do, and for his safety plead. I pray by all that is to Mortals dear,By all the Gods that you, and we revere. Let this sad Object your Compassion move,Regard his Valour, and regard my Love. Oh! Let his hapless Fate your soul incline,Pity his glooming Youth, or pity mine. Oh, melt beneath divine Compassion's Charms,Let not your Breast be harder then your Arms. save his dear Life, he of his Noble LineThe only Branch remains, as I, of mine. Christians profess Compassion, Mercy, Love,sure such Distress should those kind Passions move. sheath in my Breast the sword, and take my Breath,But Oh, preserve this wondrous Youth from Death. My self will to my Veins the sword apply,And to prolong his Life will gladly dy. Hear pious Prince, his aged Father hearWho thus entreats, or would if he were here. Oh, spare the spring of all my Hopes and Fears,The only Prop of my declining Years. Your fatal sword deep in my Bowels sheathAnd for the son's accepts the Father's Death. If great Possessions, or if Gold would buy,His far more precious Life, he shall not dy. His Father will a mighty Ransome give,And mine as much, say but the Youth shall live. Let us your Prisoners be in Chains confined,The Chains of Love will make those softer bind. There his dear presence I may still enjoy,And for his Ease my thoughtful Cares employ. Free from the Noise of War, and anxious Fears,I'll kiss his Wounds, and wash them with my Tears. I'll watch his midnight slumbers, and by Day,My Love shall solace to his Grief convey. Let him be banished from the British Isle;I'll go, and share the lovely Wand'rer's Toil. I'll follow thro' the swarthy burning, Zone,No Flames can scorch me, fiercer than my own. Our tender Words the savage kind will move,They'll stand, and gaze, and wonder at our Love. Th' inhospitable Desart will appear,A flowry Paradise, when he is there. O'er snows with him and Hills of Ice I'll stray,I know not how, but Love will find the way. If his sharp Keel shall cut the Foaming Tide,In the same Bark I'll on the Billows ride. No stormy Winds my stable soul shall move,Or shake the strong Foundations of my Love. But hurried with distracting Fears away,And wild with Grief I know not where to stay,And in a Maze of Thought I lose my Way. Oh! let your generous Pity calm the strifeIn my tost soul, and save his precious Life. Thus you'll not only Triumph o'er your Foe,But o'er your self, and your own Vict'ry too. Thus Elda praied, nor did she pray in vain,Her tender Accents did Admission gainTo the relenting, generous Prince's Breast,Who thus the beauteous supplicant addrest. This unexampled Effort of your Love,Does equal Wonder and Compassion move. True Christian Captains are both brave and good,Vict'ry pursue, but not with Thirst of Blood. Revenge and Cruelty we disavow,And only just and generous Arms allow. Go, to your Tears your Lothar's Life I give,Pleased with each others Love together live. Then Cerdick slain on whom they trusted most,A shivering Fear ran thro' the saxon Host. The Britons now believed the Battel won,And sure of Conquest on their squadrons run. Prince Arthur at their Head breaks thro' their FilesAnd covers all the Plain with hostile spoils. The saxon Troops dismaied, began to yield,And to the raging Conquerour leave the Field. Mean time the Prince of Hell who anxious stood,And from his Hill the bloody Labour viewed. seeing the saxon Troops at last give way,Resolves the Britons Progress to delay. That thro' the Angelick Guards he might escape,His Form he changed to a fair seraph's shape. A mild Celestial Youth, he did appear,Drest in pure Robes of white Empyreal Air. What once he was, the Fiend seemed charming bright,Concealed in Beauty, and disguised in Light. Assuming meek and heavenly Looks he strove,To imitate the loveliest Face above. Then taking from the Mountain's Top his Flight,Did straitway at th' Angelick Camp alight. And thus transformed thro' the bright Camp he went,As an Express from heaven to Michael sent. Along he marched, and slily looking round,While unobserved, a fair Occasion foundOf passing thro' their Lines, without Delay,swift as a Ray of Light, he shot away. He mingles with the fighting Armies, whereHe moulds to various shapes, the thickned Air. In sebert's warlike Form he did appear,With Arthur's gasping Head upon his spear. Which newly severed from his Body seems,so fresh the Wound, so red the bloody streams. Britons he cried, learn hence your wretched state,see your Destruction in your Leader's Fate. The towring Hopes, you vainly once conceivedAre sunk, nor can your Ruin be retreived. Whose Arms can guard your state now Arthur's dead?His Life, and with it, all your strength is fled. Fly Britons hence, and to your Hills repair,Fly to your Woods, and in your Caves despair. Protected in your Fastnesses remain,stay not t' encrease the Number of the slain. Cold to their Hearts this sight and Language went,And thro their Veins a shivering Horrour sent. Confusion and Despair their souls opprest,And their sad Looks their inward Wound confest. Urged with their Fear, their Troops began to fly,And leave behind th' unfinished Victory. Prince Arthur's Breast with Indignation burned,Who from the fierce Pursuit reluctant turned,To stop his Army's Flight, stay, Britons, stay,He cried, and blemish not this glorious Day. Whence this Distraction, whence th' ungrounded FearAnd wild Despair, that in your Looks appear. The Battel's won, the saxons quit the Field,And to your Arms a perfect Conquest yield. Let not the vanquished Foe escape Pursuit,Ths Vict'ry's yours, stay but to reap the Fruit. While thus he spoke, the Britons stood amazed,And on their Prince with Joy and Wonder gazed. Their Grief dispelled, their dying Hopes revive,And joyfull shouts proclaim the Prince alive. Mean time the sun declines, and dusky NightCovers the saxons, and protects their Flight. "
"13","Prince Arthur. BOOK IX. NOw did the beauteous Morn begin to rise,streaking with Rosy Light the smiling skies. Prince Arthur rose, and solemn Thanks addrestTo heaven, that had his Arms with Conquest blest. Then rode amidst his Troops, and one by one,Their Bravery praised, and Conduct lately shown. Dispensing great Rewards thro' all the Host,To those whose Courage was distinguished most. The Britons in their turn express their Zeal,And to the Prince the highest Love reveal. The heaven's around with Acclamations rung,And loud Applauses of the shouting Throng. Then to the sacred Temples they repair,In joyful Crowds to offer Praise and Prayer. In low Prostration they the soveraign LordOf Hosts Exalt, and future Aid implored. soon as their Hymns of heavenly Praise were sung,High in the Temples they their Trophies hung. Bruised Armour, broken shields, and standards tornFrom the fierce Foe, the gilded Roofs adorn. This Honour to th' Almighty saviour done,Prince Arthur to his Britons thus begun. Thus far success and Triumph on us wait,And to our Arms, presage a prosperous Fate. Propitious heaven is to your Part inclined,And still more glorious Vict'ries Crowd behind. The vanquished Foe can't long maintain the Field,But must your ravished Lands and Cities yield. Chase anxious Thoughts far from your Valiant Breast,And on your Cause, and heaven's Protection rest. A perfect Conquest shall your Labours Crown,And your Victorious Arms, regain your own. Fear not the Relicks of a Conquered Foe,Their tott'ring state, falls with another Blow. Now let no Funeral Honours be denied,To these brave Men, that for their Country died. Let us with sighs and Tears lament their Fate,Who fell, while striving to support our state,Ages to come shall their great Virtue praise;Viewing the Tombs that on their Graves you raise. And first the Prince to the Pavilion went,Whither brave Macor's breathless Corps was sent. He lay extended on a Purple Bed,With high raised Pillows, placed beneath his Head. His servants standing round their Grief exprest,With old Pendarvan sad above the rest. Cador to him as to his faithful Friend,For wise Instructions, did his son commend,His Counsels formed his Youth, and did prepareHis Mind for all concerns of Peace, and War. Now in his Face the deepest Grief appears,He beats his Breast, and baths it with his Tears. He wrings his Hands, and in his mournful Rage,Tears off the hoary Honours of his Age. Immoderate Grief in lamentable sounds,As Arthur entered, thro' the Room rebounds. The pious Prince with heavy sorrow prest,Burst out in Tears, and thus his Grief exprest. Inexorable Death at every HeartWithout distinction, shoots her fatal Dart. Could Beauty, Courage, Virtue, youthful AgeMove her Compassion, or divert her Rage;Brave Youth, thou hadst escaped, and lived to seeOur Triumphs, for a Vict'ry due to thee:But all thy Charms by stronger Fate o'ercome,Could not reverse th' Irrevocable Doom. Oh! thy sad sire, what swelling Grief will rollIts stormy Tyde o'er his afflicted soul?Can he the News of Macor's Death survive,Or me, with whom he trusted him, forgive?T'allay the smart may the Danmonians tell,How bravely Macor fought, how Great he fell. And how my own with Cador's Grief contends,He mourns the best of sons, and I the best of Friends. Our Hopes are gone, may the Danmonians Cry,And what Britannia can thy Loss supply?Then to Embalm the Prince he gave Command,That he might send him to his Native Land. straight with hot streams, they wash his Body o'er,And purge his skin from Dust and putrid Gore. Then in Arabian spices, fragrant Gums,Rare Aromatick Oyls, and rich Perfumes,They lay his snowy Body, which they foldIn Bands of Linnen, round him often rolled. Then from his Troops a Thousand Youths he chose,That might a solemn Equipage compose. That might accompany the Funeral state,To the unhappy Father's Palace Gate. small Comfort for so great a loss, yet dueTo the sad sire, and all the Prince could shew. Forthwith the Britons weave with bending sprigsOf Willow Trees, and tender Oaken Twigs,An easie Bier, and with soft Rushes spread,sweet Flowers, and fragrant Herbs, the lofty Bed. The Roof on high fresh spreading Branches shade,And here sublime the hapless Youth was laid. such on the Ground the fading Rose we see,By some rude Blast, torn from the Parent Tree. The Daffodil so leans his languid Head,Newly mown down, upon his grassy Bed. Tho from the Earth no more supplies they gain,Their splendid Form in part, and lovely Hue remain. Then a rich Garment, glorious to behold,Pond'rous with Orient Pearl, and stiff with Gold;A noble Present from King Odar's Hand,Received when Arthur left the Neustrian Land. Upon the Bier his Royal Bounty threw,The last Respect, that a sad Friend could shew. A noble Portion of the wealthy Prey,And spoils gained from the Foe, on Cars they lay. With Arms, and standards, that himself had won,The Trophies of the Wonders he had done. Now the magnificent, and pompous Woe,Does from the Camp, in sad Procession go. The lab'ring Axle mourns along the Road,And groans beneath th' uncomfortable Load. The Horses slowly March, and mournful look,As they their share of publick sorrow took. Pendarvan follows stooping with his years,But more with Grief, and deluged in his Tears. Then Macor's Chariot rolls, distained with Blood,On which sublime amidst the War he rode. His War-horse Rapa, with black Trappings spread,And he too seemed to weep, is after led. His Arms and polished Armour others bear,His Golden spurs, his Helmet, shield, and spear,Then in long Order the Danmonians mourned;Their spears turned backwards and their Bucklers turned. Then Arthur stood, and with sad Accent spoke;Thus far I mourn the Fate I can't revoke. Back I am called where Arms and bloody strife,With more sad Objects, must renew my Grief. Farewel brave Youth, farewel, till we above,Meet in the peaceful Realms, of Light, and Love. He said no more, but turned and took his way;Back to the Camp, which lofty Works survey. Mean time ten Oratours from Octa sent,Arrived, and waited at the Prince's Tent. Their Embassy a Truce was to obtain,To clear the Field, and to inter the slain. They urged that all Hostilities should cease,Against the Dead, who ought to rest in Peace. That all Heroick Conquerors ever gave,To those, from whom they took their Lives, a Grave. The saxons Prayer seemed just, and ten days Truce,Prince Arthur granted for this pious Use. To Cador's Court the heavy Tydings came,Born swiftly thither on the Wings of Fame. Loud Lamentation thro' the Palace went,And bitter Cries, give their strong Passion vent. Officious Fame the dismal News relates,And universal sorrow propagates. Pale Faces, crossing Arms, dejected Eyes,O'erflowing Tears, and deep, despairing sighs,Compose a finished scene of Blackest Woe,The Tragick place does all sad Figures show. The Men like pallid Ghosts pass silent by,Women outrageous in their sorrow cryMacor is dead, our Hopes too with him dy. Thro' all the streets prodigious Numbers flow,And poured out from the Gates promiscuous goTo meet their Hero's Herse, with flaming Brands,And Pitchy Torches lighted in their Hands. Which in long Order shone along the way,Disclosed the Fields, and called back banished Day. soon as they spied the lofty Herse from far,Attended with the Pomp of mournful War;A lamentable Cry the Valley fills,Eccho repeats it louder in the Hills. Wild with their Grief, distracted with Despair,They strike their throbing Breasts, tear off their Hair,And with their piercing screams disturb the Air. Both Troops unite Rivals in Love and Grief,And the sad Conquest seek with equal strife,As Cador's Love no bounds his sorrow knew,Who from their Arms and Prayers distracted flew. Close in his Arms he did the Corps embrace,Kissed his cold Lips, and bathed with Tears his Face. A scene so tender, such a moving sight,Melts all their Hearts, and does fresh Grief invite,Touched with Compassion to th' afflicted King,From their exhausted Eyes fresh Torrents spring. When the fierce Tempest had its Fury broke,With a deep sigh th' unhappy Monarch spoke. Oh, my dear son! how mild had been my Doom,Hadst thou escaped, I suffered in thy Room. This sight kills worse than Death, Oh that the DartHad mist thy Breast, and pierced thy Father's Heart!Oh, that to see this fatal Hour I live!And thee, and all that's dear in Life survive!Oh, how I wish Life's tedious Journey done,The empty Name remains, the thing is gone!But sure I shall not long thy Absence mourn,I'll hast to thee, thou'lt not to me return. My hoary Head with sorrow to the Grave,Makes hast, the best Repose my Troubles crave. Thrice happy Wife removed from us below,You have no share in this sad scene of Woe. My ill presaging Fears are now fulfilled,I started in my sleep, and cried my son is killed. I knew too well warm Blood and youthful Age,Eager with Fame, and fiered with Martial Rage,His Arms in greatest Danger would engage. I praied, and oft conjured him to beware,Not rashly to provoke unequal War. He promised me while on his Neck I wept,But oh, how ill has he his Promise kept?I can't reproach the pious Arthur's Name,Nor on his Friendship sworn reflect the Blame. If by divine, unchangeable Decree,Untimely Fate, Macor, attended thee;T'is best that thou art fal'n with such Applause,Asserting Albion's and the Christian Cause,But why do my Complaints thus endless grow,And why thus tedious my loquacious Woe?Why from new Laurels should I thus detainThese valiant Troops, to hear my sighs in vain?Go, Britons, to your Prince, at your Return,Tell him I live, but only live to mourn. I groan beneath the heaviest Load of Grief,And spend, in Tears my sad Remains of Life. May heaven his Arms with greater Triumph bless,Great as his Vertues, let him meet success. Mean time must we this last kind Office pay,And Macor's Body to the Dome convey;Where his illustrious Fathers lie interredWho reigned by subjects loved, by Neighbours feared. soon as the sun had with his early RayDeposed the shades, and re-enthroned the Day. The pious Britons their slain Friends inter,And on their Graves new Honours do confer. some with their spades, and with sharp Axes woundThe groaning Earth, and casting up the Ground,They form deep Vaults, and subterranean Caves,Then fill up with their Dead, the gaping Graves. some cast up hilly heaps, and Mounts of sand,That for their Tombs, and Monuments might stand. And to th' admiring Britons might declare,In future Ages what their Fathers were. some stones erect of a prodigious size,That bear the Hero's Glory to the skies. 
        Mean time the saxons bear away their Dead,Whose putrid Heaps, the bloody Field o'erspread. Inumerable Piles they raise on high,Which kindled fill with smoak and flames the sky. With uncouth Cries, around the Fires they mourn,Where vulgar Dead, in Heaps promiscuous Burn. The Lords, and Officers of high Command,They send attended with a warlike BandEach to his City, there to be interred,Where greater funeral Pomp might be conferred,But fair Augusta chiefly flowed with Tears,Where Grief in all her mournful Looks appears. Distracted with ungovernable Woe,Into the streets in Crowds the Matrons flow. Confusion in their Looks, and wild Despair,They wring their Hands, and tear their flowing HairParents on Children, Wives on Husbands call,sons mourn their Fathers, Maids their Lovers fall. For their dear Brothers, sisters, Tears are spent,servants their Masters, Friends their Friends lament. All mingle Tears, their Cries together flow,And form a hideous Harmony of Woe. Pale Consternation sate on every Face,They feared the Prince would soon invest the Place. They oft reproached their Monarch's Breach of Word,That had exposed them to the Conquerour's sword. They wished that this destructive War might cease,And Ethelina be the Bond of Peace. Octa's Affairs in this ill state appear,such was their publick Grief, and such their Fear. Mean time the Briton joyful sports ordained,For the great Vict'ry by their Arms obtained. For Horsemanship the Britons always famed,To run a Course his generous Gifts inflamed. Desire both of the Prize, and loud Applause,The British Youth to mount their Coursers draws. A neighbouring Hill ascending high, but slow,surveied the Valleys, with his lofty Brow. Upon the flowry Top a spacious Down,Extended lay, which shady Woods did crown. The grassy Plains, and rising Groves appear,Like a rich furnished, native Theater. Where sylvan scenes, their verdant Pomp display,And charming Prospects to the Eye convey. soon as the sun, had with his Rosy Light,From the cold Air, dispelled the dewy Night. The British Hero with a numerous Train,Directs his steps, to this delightful Plain. Where high amidst his Friends he takes his Place,VVho swarmed around to view the noble Race. Britons, Armoricans, and Neustrians stoodMingled below, the foremost of the Crowdstood Eddelin in all his Youthful Pride,His Purple Boots were of Iberian Hide,VVhich fast with Golden Buttons held, and gracedVVith silver spurs, his comely Legs embraced. A flaming Ruban of sydonian Dy,In a close Knot, his curling Locks did ty. VVhich playing on his shoulders flew behind,Danced in the Air, and sported with the VVind. Close to his well shaped VVast, he wore his Coat,Of silk and silver, by his Mother wrought. A Cap of Crimson did his Head equip,And as he walked, he slashed his breaded VVhip. His swarthy Groom his generous Courser leads,That scarcely marks the Ground, so light he treads. swift as a Dove pursued, or Mountain Hind,His nimbler Feet could overtake the VVind,Leave flying Darts, and swifter storms behind. Illustrious Blood he Boasts with equal Pride,Transmitted to his Veins on either side. The Mother Mare was of Eborac Race,The sire Augusta's Merchants, brought from Thrace. 
        His inward Fire thro' his wide Nostrils flies,And noble Ardor sparkles in his Eyes. His well turned Limbs did Admiration move,Where strength, and Beauty for the Conquest strove. His matchless speed the Prize did ever gain,From all the Rival Coursers of the Plain. Next Blanadoc upon the Plain advancedAnd led behind his fiery Courser pranced. Lightly equiped, and ready for the Race,He marches to the Base with Manly Grace. The gazing Crowd admire his comely steed,Nobly descended from the famous Breed,That on the Mauritanian Mountains feed. And famed for swiftness in the Dusty Course,Of wondrous Beauty, and of wondrous Force. And next to him the gay Lanvallo cameEager to win the Prize, and raise his Name. His dapled Courser to the Base advanced,And neighing wantonly along the Champain danced. His high Descent he did from Draco trace,The swiftest Courser of th' Iberian Race. A Race so famous for their speedy Feet,Eurus himself, was not esteemed more fleet. so swift they run, that vulgar Fame declares,The Western Winds, impregnated the Mares. Next the fierce Tudor comes into the Field,That did to none for Art or Courage yield. A Velvet Bonnet on his Head, and drestFor Lightness, in a thin embroidered Vest. Thirsty of Honour to the Base he flies,And with his greedy Wishes grasps the Prize. His well-trained Courser was admired for speed,sprung from Calabrian, mixt with British Breed. Light'ning flew from his Eyes, and Clouds of smoakedark'ning the Air, from his large Nostrils broke. None of the Rival steeds arrived before,More Wonder raised, or promised Conquest more. Next Trebor came upon a noble Horse,And oft Victorious in the rapid Course. He gently stroked his Mane, and bid him shewOn this great Day, the Feet he used to do. With many more, whose long forgotten Name,Was ne'er enrolled in the Records of Fame. While round the Base the wanton Coursers play,Th' ambitious Riders in just scales they weigh. And those that by their Rules were found too light,Quilt Lead into their Belts, to give them weight. All things adjusted, and the Laws agreeed,Each eager Rival mounts his generous steed. To whom th' indulgent Prince himself addrest,And to inflame their Zeal these Words exprest. Let no brave Youth despair of his Reward,Due Gifts, and Honours are for all prepared. Whoe'er are Rivals of the rapid Race,Two costly spears shall win, their plated BaseGlitters in silver sockets finely wroughtBy rare Engravers, from Germania brought. Their Points are gilt, illustrious to behold,Whence a deep Fring depends of silk and Gold. Besides a Back-sword whose well tempered Blade,Is of the famed Iberian Metal made. The happy Youth that smeared with sweat, and Dust,shall reach the Goal, midst loud Applauses first,This Golden Goblet his Reward shall boast,By Damon wrought, with Figures high embost. The second Conq'rour shall in Triumph wear,In a rich Belt, this Persian scimiter. The Haft's a costly stone that Nature stainsWith various Figures, and with Bloody Veins. The chiefest Workmen of the curious EastHave in the inlaid Blade, their Art exprest. The third shall win a noble polished shield,Three Coursers rarely pourtraied on the Field. The signal giv'n by the shrill Trumpet's sound,The Coursers start, and scowr along the Ground. so Boreas starting from his Northern Goal,sweeps o'er the Mountains to the adverse Pole. His furious Wings the flying Clouds remove,From the Blue Plains, and spacious Wilds above. Insulting o'er the seas he loudly roars,And shoves the tumbling Billows to the shores. While for the Palm the straining steeds contend,Beneath their Hoofs the Grass does scarcely bend. so long and smooth their strokes, so swift they pass,That the spectators of the noble Race,Can scarce distinguish by their doubtful Eye,If on the Ground they run, or in the Air they fly. so when the Earth smiles with a summers Ray,And wanton swallows o'er the Valleys play. In sport each other they so swiftly chase,sweeping with easie Wings, the Meadow's Face,They seemed upon the Ground to fly a Race. O'er Hills, and Dales, the speedy Coursers fly,And with thick Clouds of Dust obscure the sky. With clashing Whips, the furious Riders tearTheir Coursers sides, and wound th' afflicted Air. Never Epirean, or Arabian steed,Flew o'er the Olympic Plains, with greater speed. On their thick Manes the stooping Riders ly,Press forwards, and would fain their steeds outfly. By Turns they are behind, by Turns before,Their Flanks and sides, all bathed in sweat, and Goresuch speed the steeds, such Zeal the Riders shew,To reach bright Fame, that swift before them flew. Upon the last with spurning Heels the firstCasts storms of sand, and smothering Clouds of Dust. The hindmost strain their Nerves, and snore, and blow,And their white Foam upon the Foremost throw. Eager of Fame, and of the promised PrizeThe Riders seize the Mark with greedy Eyes. Now Hopes dilate, now Fears contract their Breast,Alternately with Joy, and Grief possest. Thus far with equal Fate the Riders passUncertain who should conquer in the Race. But now the Goal appearing does exciteNew warmth, and calls out all their youthful Might. They lash their Courser's Flanks with Crimson died,And stick their goring spurs into their side. Their Native Courage, and the Riders stroke,T' exert their Force, the generous Kind provoke. Each springs out to the Goal with loosened Reins,Works all his Nerves, and staring Eye-balls strains. In this fierce strife, Tudor's the best for wind,shot forth, and left the panting steeds behind. Eddelin the other Rivals overpast,Trebor came next, Lanvallo was the last. Draco, his steed, had once unrivaled Fame,When in the Pride, and Pomp of Youth he came;Curvetting o'er the Plain, to win the Course,All yielded to his swiftness, and his Force. siff Limbs now shew his Age, with drudging PaceHe sweats behind, and labours thro' the Race. Now Tudor whips, and spurs his Courser on,And near the Goal believed the Goblet won. When running o'er a naked, chauky Place,slipp'ry with nightly Dew, and bare of Grass,Up flew the Courser's Heels, and to the GroundHe, and the Rider, fell with mighty sound. The sudden Danger could not be declinedBy Eddelin, that followed close behind. For stumbling on young Tudor's hapless Horse,His Floundring fell, and lost the hopeful Course. The mean time Trebor spured, and forwards sprung. While all the Field with Acclamations rung. First to the Goal his reeking Courser came,Next Blanadoc, Lanvallo third in Fame. The Victors by the Goal triumphant stood,surrounded by the thick applauding Crowd. When Tudor rushing in, cries out of wrong,And challenging the Prize, broke thro' the Throng. The Judges over-ruled the Youth's Demand,Urging the first established Rules should stand. The Prince confirmed their sentence, and declaredWho first arrived, should have the first Reward▪
        But on the two, that by ill Fortune crost,The Vict'ry almost in Possession, lost,Rich Marks of Royal Bounty he conferred,And with his smiles, their drooping spirits cheered. A famous Quiver wrought by Didon's Hand,With Thracian Arrows stored, at his CommadWas first on Tudor, as a Gift confered;And cross his shoulders hung the bright Reward,Eddelin that never hoped so mild a Doom,Receives a silver Helm, and milk white Plume. This Kindness to th' unfortunate exprest,He gives the promised Prizes to the rest. Arthur rose up, and all their Footsteps bendBack to their Camp, which lofty Works defend. And now the Britons all their Hands employ,To fetch Materials in, for Fires of Joy. All to the Mountains, and the Woods repair,And with their Labour fill the ecchoing Air. They raise their Axes, and with toilsome strokes;Fell the tall Elms, and lop the spreading Oaks. They bear the nodding Trees to every Town,And from the Mountains, draw the Forrests down. In every City with the shady spoils,The joyful Youth erected lofty Piles. Nearer the skies they raise th' aspiring Wood,Than when before, upon the Hills it stood. soon as the sun his Beamy Light withdrew,And the brown Air grew moist with Ev'ning Dew:The shouting Britons, set the Piles on fire,And tow'ring Flames to heaven's high Roof aspire. Up the steep Air the ruddy Columns play,And to the stars their Rival Light convey. Around the burning Piles the Crowds rejoyce,And mingle shouts, with the shrill Trumpet's Voice. heaven's starry Arch with Acclamations rings,While the glad Throng, Arthur's loud Praises sings. Let Arthur live, the Towns and Fields resound,Let Arthur live, the ecchoing Hills reboundThe Evening thus in Mirth and Triumph past,The Britons to their Rest retired at last. Mean time four Lords arrived from Tollo, craveAudience of Octa, which the saxon gave. To hear their Embassy, in regal stateHigh on his Throne, the saxon Monarch sate. Duncan the cheif broke silence thus, we bringThis Message from the great Albanian King;He is advanced, to give that powerful Aid,Which by his Orator's King Octa praied. A valiant Host obeying his Command,Whose conquering swords, no force could yet withstand,Who laid the Caledonian Forrest wast. And from their Forts the fierce Meatian chased;Halts on a Plain, three Leagues removed from hence,Ready t' engage their Arms in your Defence. But then our Leader prays, that when you come,The Britons all subdued, in Triumph home,Fair Ethelina may be then his own,The bright Reward, that shall his Labours crown. If to these happy Nuptialls you incline,He'll straight with yours, his valiant Forces joyn. Let not the saxons doubt great Tollo's Arms,Will free your Kingdom from the Foes AlarmsHe said, forthwith Octa in counsel sate,A matter so important to debate. When Osred thus began,Great Exigencies of our state perswade,That we comply with this Proposal made;We are compelled by hard Affairs, to courtTh' Albanian Arms, our Kingdom to support. You know too well, how much the saxons Host,Is weakened, by the Numbers we have lost,When matchless Arthur did our Troops invade,What Havock his victorious Progress made. What wide Destruction in our Army raged,Where'er his fatal Weapons were engaged. Our frighted Troops, when he advances, flyswift as the Clouds, the Winds chace thro' the sky. But valiant Tollo, rivals Arthur's Fame,Equal their Courage, and their strength the same. Against the Briton He'll the Field maintain,And on his Buckler his vast strokes sustain. No stronger Champion traversed yet the Field,To him or none the British Prince must yield. Kind heaven has sent a Man so great, and Brave,From Arthur's Arms, our threatned state to save. I would not then his just Desire withstand,But let him know, you grant him his Demand. This Grant to such a Prince we must allow,Was always fit, but necessary now. He ceased, and next Pascentius silence broke,And wisely thus th' attentive Peers bespoke. I once advised that to preserve the state,We should strict Friendship with Prince Arthur make. That we Britannia should between us share,And with the Princess Nuptials end the War. The Terms proposed the British Hero please,And all things seemed to promise lasting Peace. But when we were informed the British HostHad half their Force, by raging sickness lost. Thinking we might with Ease, the Foe defeat,VVe from the Terms our selves proposed, retreat. I wish that Rupture May not heaven provoke,To bring our Necks beneath the British Yoke. With all our Force the Britons we assail,But Arthur's unresisted Arms prevail. How great a Loss the saxons undergo,Our bleeding Wounds and endless Funerals show. What Hero can be found to guard our state,Against Prince Arthur's Arms, and prosp'rous Fate. True, Tollo's Deeds give him a warlike Name,But much inferiour to the Briton's Fame. If we confiding in th' Albanian's sword,Fresh Triumphs to the Briton should afford:Who after, shall controuling Bounds oppose,To the victorious Progress of our Foes?Who then against the Torrent can contend,And from th' o'erflowing Flood, our Towns defend. We shall in vain our former Conquests boast,The saxon sinks, and all Britannia's lost. All things well weighed, Prince Arthur looks to meAs one supported by divine Decree,To Empire raised, by unchanged Destiny. If so in vain all our Attempts are made,In vain we build our Hopes on Tollo's Aid. We shall oppose inevitable Fate,And in our Ruin learn our Fault, too late. I would Prince Arthur's Temper sound, and striveOnce more, the former Treaty to revive. This way we may controul the Conquerors' Arms,And Arthur bind by Ethelina's Charms. This way perhaps you'll stem the rapid Tyde,And gain a Conquest to your Arms denied. Pascentius ceased, Crida with Choler burned,And with an Air disturbed these Words returned:We all well know Pascentius Tongue, was madesmooth, soft, and fluent fitted to perswade. For courtly Arts, and fine Intreagues of state,No saxon Genius can Pascentius mate. All to his Eloquence at home must yield,As he to all, for Courage in the Field. Men of the Cabinet take no Delight,In bloody War, they are too wise to fight. The Briton's strength, and Arthur's Arms I find,strike fiercely on a Prudent timerous Mind. A brave Heroick spirit can't despair,That minds the Turns and doubtful Chance of War. Joyned by the Pict and Albanian Horse,We'er much superiour to the British Force. Tollo and Mordred, both for Arms are famed,Whose Deeds with greater Wonder are proclaimed?We too have Heros left that dare engageThe Briton's Arm, and can sustain his Rage. My self will meet him in the Field, and standUnmoved against the Fury of his Hand. shall we at last a conquered Nation fear,And long inured to Victory despair. Let not our vile submission stain our Name,And lessen thro' the World the saxon Fame. No, let the King with Tollo's Prayer comply,Our Forces joyned must make the Britons fly. He ceased, the Councel murmured their Applause,And pleased with this Advice King Octa rose. He straight dispatched th' Albanian Orators,By whom the valiant Tollo he assures,That he the Britons by his Aid subdued,shall Ethelina wed for whom he sued. Withall he added that Affairs required,Their Troops should joyn, before the Truce expired. His Oratours returned, to Tollo bring,The pleasing Answer of the saxon King. Tollo transported with excessive Joy,Believes no Rival could his Hopes destroy. As if the Battel were already won,He thinks the Beauteous Princess is his own. Glitt'ring in Arms, like a refulgent star,He leads his scotish Nation to the War. A Nation fierce and haughty by success,Which Albion's Northern soil did then posess. For a rude, cruel People, bred to spoil,To Blood, and Rapine, from th' Hibernian Isle,Did in this Age, infest th' Albanian Coast,And landed there at last their barb'rous Host. scots they were called, from their wild Island's Name,For scotia, and Hibernia were the same. Here their new seats the prosperous Pyrates, fix,And their course Blood, with the old Britons mix. These their Albanian seats, new scotia stile,Leaving Hibernia, to their native Isle. The Calidonian Britons dispossestAnd by a hard tirannick Yoke opprest;Did these Hibernian, scotish Lords obey,And felt the Curses of a forraign sway. This Nation then obeied King Tollo's Laws,And now in Arms asserts the saxon Cause. The mighty Donald, of the Northern Isles,
        Of Visage fierce, and dreadful with the spoilsOf grisly Bears, and of the foaming Boar,Which hideous Pride he o'er his shoulders wore,Marches his vig'rous Troops into the Field,Whose thundring swords, themselves could only weild. By their rough Captains led, they left the land,Where once the old Meatians did command. And where the Walls from sea to sea extend,By Romans built, their Province to defend. stupendous Bulwarks whose unnumbered Towers,Repeled th' Incursions of the Northern Powers. But when proud Rome was weak and feeble grown,Th' insulting Foe broke the high Fences down. Now Ruins show where the chief Fabrick stood,Between wide Tinna's and Itunna's Flood. The Youth from all the Towns that did obeyIn ancient times, the mild Normantian sway. such as possest th' Elgovian seats, and thoseWho tilled the Land where silver Devia flows. Who on the wild and bleaky shore reside,Insulted by the rough Hibernian Tide. To aid the saxon from their Country came,By Dongal led, a Lord of Martial Fame. Those where Verdera rears her lofty Towers,And Glotta's Tide into the Ocean pours. And where th' Orestian Princes heretofore,And Attacottian Lords the scepter bore. Those where the Otadenian Cities stood,Between Alanus, and fair Vedra's Flood. They march from Castralata and the shore,Where wide Boderia's noisy Billows roar. Then those from Vindolana and the LandWhere Aelians Bridge and high Cilurnum stand. Mackbeth a great Commander of the North,And rocky Highlands, draws his Nation forth. Loose Mantles o'er their brawny shoulders flung,With careless Pride beneath their midleg hung. Cerulean Bonnets on their Heads they wore,And for their Arms, broad swords and Targets bore. The Youth poured out from fair Victoria's Gates,From Orrea and the old Gadenian seats. And from the spacious Caledonian Wood,And where Cebinus rolls his rapid Flood. These Troops were by the fierce Congellar led,Of Malcol's Royal stock the famous Head. Who first from wild Ierne wasted o'er,His barb'rous Engines to th' Albanian shore. Those from the Vicomagians Cities came,From high Banatia, and from ancient Tame. 
        And they who dwelt on either verdant BankOf Longo's stream, and those that Itys drank. With those that stretcht along the western Coast,To whom the old Creonian Towns were lost,Where high Epidium midst th' Hibernian Waves,Protrudes his Head, and all their Monsters braves. Those from the Towns along the flowry sideOf Northern Tinna, and fair Tava's Tide. Where once the happy Venicontes dwelt,Before the forraign Conquerours Yoke was felt. There was a northern Nation fierce and boldOn whose died Bodies, fearful to behold,Wild Beasts inscribed, and ravenous Birds were born,Which their vast Limbs did dreadfully adorn. so fierce they seemed, as ready to devour,The naked Limbs, that the wild Monsters bore. Their Hieroglyphick Armies, stained and smearedWith various Colours, and strange Forms appearedIn Pageant Armour, and in painted state,Like Troops of Heralds, who on Triumphs wait. This Nation Picts were called, who wafted o'erFrom scandinavia, and the bleaky shoreOf southern scythia, did these seas infest,And with their Fleets, the British Coast molest. Their Pyracy's by sea, and Thefts by Land,Th' exhausted Britons did in vain withstand. No more of Rome's declining Power afraid,They did the weak, defenceless Isle invade. Th' affrighted Briton from the shore retreats,And leaves the Conquerour his abandoned seats. Their King at Pleasure, this fierce Nation made,And Mordred now th' imperial scepter swaied. He to King Tollo by his Queen allied,And now by closer Bonds of Interest tied. Commands his Men to take their shield and Launce,And with the scotish Army to advance. They marched, who then possest the Hilly Land,Which th' ancient Carnonatian did command. From Ricine, and the frozen Hebudes,
        Laved by the loud Deucaledonian seas. From all the Towns whence their victorious sword,Forced the Carenian Prince, the rightful Lord. Where the wild Hiperborean Ocean raves,And on the Rocks breaks his tempestuous Waves. They came who then the Mertian Cities filled,And held the Lands that once the Logian tilled. They left the soil where swift Tuesis flows,Where Grampius stands in everlasting snows,Which like the famed Riphean Hills appears,And with his Head divides the neighb'ring spheres. From all the Land where Loxa's Current flows,Which Vara's, and Tuesis streams inclose. Where once the bold Decantians did reside,And from their Hills the Power of Rome defied. These with the saxon Troops their Arms uniteWho so well reinforced prepare for Fight,VVhile wounded in his Tent King Octa staid,King Tollo, as their Leader, all obeied. "
"14","Prince Arthur. BOOK X. AUrora's Beams now on the Mountains smiled,And adverse Clouds with Purple Edgings gild,Boyling with Martial Rage King Tollo stands,And his high Chariot, and his steeds demands. steeds, whiter than the purest Alpine snows,And fleeter than the Gales that Boreas blows. He triumphed when his noble Breed appeared,Their Harness thick with Gold and silver smeared. When he their thundring Neighings heard, and sawTheir wanton Hoofs the trembling Valley paw. The Grooms and Charioteers about him stand,Reining the snorting Coursers in their Hand. stroking their Backs, they their hot spirits soothed,And their high Manes with Combs, and spunges smoothed. Tollo mean time, puts on his mighty Arms,And all the Field resounds with loud Alarms. Each Army does for Bloody Toil prepare,And draw their Troops out, to renew the War. The thund'ring Coursers shake the trampled Ground,And warlike Clamours from the Hills rebound. Across the Plain the rapid Chariots fly,And with thick Clouds of Dust annoy the sky. An Iron Harvest on the Field appears,Of Launces, burnished shields, and bristling spears. Thronged Heads in long embattled Ranks disposed,The lowring Front of horrid War disclosed. First furious Tollo springs out from the Lines,And on the Plain in radiant Armour shines. His polished Helm opprest the dazled sight,And shone on high, like a huge Globe of Light. The Golden shield his mighty Arm did bear,Hung, like a blazing Meteor, in the Air. His Coat of Mail was on his shoulders cast,And Golden Pieces his vast Thighs encased. The Pieces round his Legs, Gold Buttons tied,And his broad sword hung dreadful by his side. Which when drawn out, like a destructive FlameOf Light'ning, from the ample scabbard came. In such illustrious Arms King Tollo shone,And thought no strength superiour to his own. Then shaking in his Hand his massy spear,He cried aloud, that all his Threats might hear. This spear ne'er yet deceived its Master's Hand,Nor could the bravest Knight its Force withstand. Witness Albodian, and great Locrine slainIn single Combates, on th' Albanian Plain. Witness ye Caledonian Princes, you,Whom with vast spoil on Tava's Banks I slew. Now, by this faithful spear shall Arthur dy,If his just Fears perswade him not to fly. T' Augusta's Gates I'll bring his severed Head,And in his spoils, fair Ethelina wed. Thus Tollo boasts, thus did his Fury rise,And streaks of Fire flashed from his raging Eyes. so when a tawny Lyon, from the sideOf some high Lybian Mountain, has descried. A spotted Leopard, or a foaming Boar,To rouse his Courage he begins to roar,He shakes his hideous sides, his Bristles riseAnd fiercely round he rowls his fiery Eyes. Again he roars, his Paws the Mountains tear,A fearful Preface to th' ensuing War. High in his Chariot Tollo then advanced,And from his Arms amazing Lustre glanced. A Martial Ardour sparkled in his Eyes,And hot with Choler he the Foe defies. so when the spring's warm Breath, and chearing RayCalls from his Cave th' awakened snake, that layFolded to Rest, while Winter snows concealedThe Mountains Heads, and Frosts the Lakes congealed▪
        The sloughy spoils from his sleek Back deposed,And the gay Pride of his new skin disclosed,He views himself with Youthful Beauties crowned,Elated casts his haughty Eyes around,And rolls his speckled spires along the Ground. Fresh Colours dy his sides, and thro' his VeinsTurgid with Life, reviving Vigour reigns. The sprightly Beast unfolds upon the PlainThe glossy Honours of his summer Train. His Crest erected high, and forky Tongueshot out, he hisses, bounds, and leaps along. such Life and Vigour valiant Tollo shows,Marching with eager Haste to meet his Foes. And now the British Host advanced in sight,With chearful Looks, and eager of the Fight. Prince Arthur in refulgent Arms appeared,High in the midst, the saxons saw, and feared. As when a Merchant richly laden spies,A lowring storm far in th' Horizon rise,A deadly Fear o'er all his Vitals reigns,And his chill Blood hangs curdled in his Veins. He furls his sails, and fits his ship to bearThe dreadful Hurricane ascending thro' the Air. Now both th' embattled Hosts advancing nearKing Tollo shakes his long, outrageous spear. And crying out, and threatning from afar,In his swift Chariot flew amidst the War. His rapid Wheels cut thro' the thickest FilesWith fearful Ruine, and prodigious spoils. Hapless Vodinar first his Arm did feel,And in his Breast received the pointed steel. Next Byron on the sand expiring lies,Orpes flies to his Aid, and with him dies. Kentwin, Morosten, Caradoc he slew,And with his Javelin pierced stout Mervin thro'. Then you brave Youths, Risan, and Tudor fellWho did in strength, and martial skill excel. His fatal spear transfixt bold Arnon's sides,And from his Neck, his sword the Head divides. As Udas fled, the hissing Dart he sentEntered his Back, and thro' his Navel went,He fell, and on the Dust, sad to behold,His Bowels issuing from his Belly rolled. Runo's right Knee his Javelin did invade,And in the Bone the glitt'ring Weapon staid. strong Runo fell, and as he wildly stared,And many moving Words in hast preparedTo beg his Life, th' insulting Conquerour flew,And with his spear pierced his pale Body thro'. Groaning he lay, and fetcht long double sighsWhile in thick Mists Death swims upon his Eyes. Next Leoline, King Cadwall's son he killed,A beauteous Youth, and not in War unskilled. His Head the Fauchion to the shoulders cleft,And on the Dust his groveling Body left. Ouenar felt within a sudden Dread,And turning round his Chariot, would have fled. When his long spear the fierce Albanian threw,Which crasht the Bones, and thro' the Temples flew. Headlong Ouenar fell, and on the GroundLay welt'ring in his Blood, poured from his Wound. His fatal Weapons vast Destruction made,And where he passed, the slain in Heaps were laid. so when a Flood from th' Hyperborean Hills,Rolls thund'ring down, and all the Valley fills,Where the high snows dissolved by summer Beams,In one vast Deluge joyn their various streams:The roaring Tide with its impetuous Course,O'erflows the Banks, and with resistless Forcesweeps Houses, Harvest, Herds, and Flocks away,Nor can the loftiest Mounds its Progress stay. With equal Rage, with such impetuous Hast,Great Tollo thro' the thick Battalions past. The rapid Wheels of his swift Chariot burn,And in their Course the thronged Brigades o'erturn. O'er scattered Arms, bright Helms, broad shields of Brass,And broken spears, his raging Axles pass. O'er Heaps of Dead the furious Warrior flies,And fills with Dust, and ratling Noise, the skies. The squallid Field, a Crimson Torrent choaks,And mingled Dust, and Blood oppress his Chariot's spoakes. The trembling Ground th' outrageous Coursers tear,And snoring, brow their Foam into the Air. Their fervid Nostrils breath out Clouds of smoke,And Flames of Fire from their hot Eyeballs broke. With furious Hoofs o'er slaughtered Heaps they fly,And dash up Bloody Rain amidst the sky. Reeking in sweat, and smeared with Dust and GoreThey spurn the sand, and thro' the Battel roar. Then valiant Malgo with a fresh Brigade,Advanced the mighty Warriour to invade. While from another Part his Warlike Band,Bothan led up, and made a noble stand. Now showers of Darts, and feathered Arrows flyAt Tollo's Breast, that darkened all the sky. When valiant Marodan approaching near,With all his strength, casts his impetuous spear. It passed the Buckler's Plates, and folded Hide,And thro' his Armour slightly razed his side. Tollo incensed, collecting all his Might,Broke thro' their Ranks, and put the Foe to Flight. Now dire Destruction reigns amidsts their Files,And all the Field was spread with warlike spoils. so when Battavian Harpooniers assail,With their sharp Launces, some prodigious Whale,
        That like a floating Mountain, lies at Ease,Vastly extended on the frozen seas. When the Leviathan begins to feel,Within his wounded side, the bearded steel;And looking round, sees all the ambient Flood,Deeply distained with its old Monarch's Blood. straight all enraged, he throws himself about,And thro' the Air does Crimson Rivers spout. swift, as a storm, he does the Foe assail,VVith his expanded Fins, and hideous Tail. some Barks are crushed, as with a falling Rock,And some o'erturned, sink with the dreadful shock. The rest ply all their Oars, and frighted row,Thro' Fields of Ice, to shun th' unequal Foe. Canvallo then brought up a stronger Force,Whom Galbut joyned to stop th' Albanian's Course. The fainting Britons these fresh Troops protect,And with their Arms great Tollo's Triumphs checkt. And now their thick Brigades were close engaged,And thro' the bloody Field Destruction raged. Now Man to Man stood close, and spear to spear,Helms mixt with Helms, and shields with shields appear. Arrows aloft in feathered Tempests fly,Darts hiss at Darts, encountring in the sky. A dreadful Noise distracting all the Air,Came from the hoarce Cerberean Throat of War. While Arms on Arms, Bucklers on Bucklers ring,swords clash with swords, and flying Javelins sing. some threaten loud, while some for Quarter cry,And some insult, while some in Torment dy. As when a Torrent down some Mountain's side,To the low Valleys rolls its rapid Tide,Where mighty stones and rocky Fragments, highWithin the rude, unfashioned Channels ly. O'er abrupt Tracks its Course the Deluge bends,And roaring down with mighty Falls, descends. Prodigious Noise th' Aerial Region fills,The shepherds hear, and tremble on their Hills. Or asWhen high Vesuvius stowed with wealthy stores,Preluding to some dire Irruption, roars,While horrible Convulsions shake its Womb,And lab'ring sides, which hidden War entomb. Th' imprisoned Thunder bellows under Ground,And the loud Noise fill all the heavens around. August Parthenope's gilt Turrets shake,And fair Campania's wealthy Farmers quake. such was the loud distracting Noise of War,such horrid Clamours tore th' aflicted Air,While the fierce Foes against each other raged,And for Britannia's Empire were engaged. The neighing steeds, and wounded Warriours cries,And rising Clouds of Dust confound the skies. Mordred mean time the mighty Pictan King,Does to the Charge, his threatning squadrons bring. sticking his Golden Rowels in the sidesOf his huge steed, amidst the Ranks he rides. The British Horse unshaken as a Rock,Bravely sustained th' Invaders thundring shock. King Meridoc who did the Horse commandConfirmed his Men, to make so brave a stand. Yet many valiant Britons Mordred slew,First with his spear he pierced brave Iasper thro'. The valiant Giffith by unhappy Chance,Came in his Way, and felt his fatal Launce. Beneath his Ear the Weapon pierced his Head,He fell, and in a Moment stretcht out dead. His furious Arm noble Lodanar feltOn whose high Crest so fierce a stroke he dealt,The Briton stuned with the prodigious Blow,Drops the loosed Reins, and lets his Weapons go. The frighted Courser thro the Battle Flies,Lodanor in the Dust dismounted lies. The Horses Hoofs in pieces crush his Head,And deep into the Mire his Bowels tread. Then with great Fury he at Adel flew,And griped him with his furious Hand, and drewThe Briton from his seat, his fiery steedscours o'er the Field, from his lost Rider freed. Wrigling and spurning in his Arms the PreyMidst loud Applauses Mordred bears away. so when an Eagle from some Mountain's Top,To truss a timerous Leveret makes a stoop,And in his crooked Pounces takes him up. struggling he mounts, and squeaks amidst the skies,And faster than he ran before, he flies. To fight the Pict straight Guinan did advanceBut in his shield broke his projected Launce. Then at the Briton Mordred's Javelin flewIt mist the Rider, but the Courser slew. Extended on the Ground the groaning Beast,Th' unhappy Rider with his Weight opprest. Mordred dismounts, and with his glitt'ring DartLoudly insulting, stabs him to the Heart. Guinan a Friend to Meridoc was dearWho at his Death enraged caught up his spear,And shaking it from far, with mighty Rage,spurs thro' their Ranks King Mordred to engage. The Pictan Monarch who elated stood,Like some tall Oak, that overlooks the Wood,Or some high Tower, which with its lofty Headsurveys the Towns beneath, around it spread,Lifts his Gigantick spear, and cried aloud,To Meridoc advancing thro' the Crowd,Briton come on, and but a Moment stand,A glorious Fate expect from Mordred's Hand. Let not thy Fears perswade thee hence to flie,heavens give thee Courage to come up, and die. King Meridoc his spear in Answer sent,Which in the shield's third Ply its Fury spent. Then Mordred threw, aloft the Weapon hist,Ludar it slew, but Meridoc it mist. Brave Ludar was a Lord of Neustrian Blood,Who long in vain the fair Marinda wooed. To bless him with her smiles, and heal his Wound,But from the scornful Maid no Pity found:Lost in Despair, he left his native soil,His Torments to beguile with Martial Toil. Now wounded by an erring spear, he liesCried out Marinda, cruel Fate! and dies. Then did the Briton's second Weapon flyWhich thro' his Armour, pierced King Mordred's Thigh. Which from the Flesh he strove to draw in vain,Then flew about wreckt with Tormenting Pain. Wildly he stared, and turned his Courser's Head,Aloud he roared, and from the Combat fled. so when a sword-Fish, urged with generous Rage,Does a vast Whale, in Northern seas engage. The Finny Warriours with a furious CourseTo Battel rush, and meet with wondrous Force. A noble Fight ensues, and dreadful strokesAfflict the Main, and shake the neighb'ring Rocks. As they advance, they drive high seas before,The Monsters bellow, and the Billows roar. The boiling sea, with greater Fury raves,Then when incumbent storms press on its Waves. The surges raging with intestine War,With high, curled Heads, look terrible from far. The Foam of breaking Waves, in pointed sleetLike driven snow does on the Ocean beat. At every shock the dashing Waters fly,And clouds of Liquid dust obscure the sky. At last the Whale his shining Belly goared,By his fierce Enemy's invading sword;Wild with his Rage and Pain whole seas does spout,And like a floating Island, rolls about. The wounded Monster does the seas out roar,And tumbles thro' the Billows to the shore,Leaving behind broad Tracks of Purple Gore. Thus strove the Pictan and the British Horse,While pious Arthur with resistless Force;In radiant Arms, bright as th' autumnal star,Flies thro' the Foe, himself a fearful War. With his victorious sword, which waved on high,Made flaming Bows, and Arches in the sky. The Body of their Battel he invades,And thro' a sea of Blood victorious wades. Where'er the Conq'rour did his progress bend,Ruin and wide Destruction did attend. Prodigious Numbers by his Weapons fall,And on their Gods in vain the saxons call. He made his way, like an impetuous Flood,Or furious Burning, raging thro' the WoodWhere'er he passed the Dead lay thick behind,As sapless Leaves, spread by a boistrous Wind. Uffina first a valiant Lord did feelIn his left side, the Briton's piercing steel. Next Godred fell from valiant Ingulf sprung,And as he fell, his Arms upon him rung. Next fell the famous Ethelbert betwixt,The Head and shoulders with a Dart transfixt. Nothing his Courage, or illustrious Blood,That to his Veins from mighty Odin's stowed;Nothing his well proved Armour when assailedBy Arthur's hand, the noble Youth availed. struggling he lay, and wallowed on the GroundIn the warm streams that rushed out from his Wound. A gloomy Night o'erwhelms his dying Eyes,And his disdainful soul, from his pale Bosom flies. Then Imerick he slew a valiant Chief,And Lodocan that rushed to his Relief:One with his Fauchion, th' other with his spear,That cleft the Head, this pierced from Ear to Ear. Next from his Arm a singing Javelin sent,Thro' the left Groin of mighty Crida went. The wounded Chief retires in tort'ring Pain,And Tracks of Blood his halting Leg distain. Then sigebert a noble Youth he slew,The fatal Weapon pierced his Temples thro'. His furious Dart did next at Ebald fly,Which thro' his shield pierced deep into his Thigh:Inflamed with Rage, and roaring out with Pain,He strove to pull the Weapon out in vain. His Javelin next transfixt Congellars's Reins,And out his Life gushed from his opened Veins. Then Edbert fellThro' the Bright Helmet which his Head encased,Thro' Bones, and Brains the furious Javelin passed;And his left Eye from out its Circle struck,On the sharp Point, a ghastly Prospect stuck. Then Ethelrick a stout west saxon Lord,And Ida fell, by his victorious sword. The first his Head down to his shoulders cleft,Fell to the Ground, of Breath and sense bereft. The heavy Blade falling with oblique sway,Half thro' the other's Neck, did make its way. The Head half severed on his shoulders hung,And from the Wound a bloody Torrent sprung. Rolling in Gore upon the Field he lay,Wildly he stared, and groaned his life away,As when a mighty Tempest from the East,The sea assailed, and on the Billows prestBy heaven's Command, that Iacob's Fav'rite Race,Might Pharaoh's Arms escape, and safely pass. Th' astonished Ocean did its Force obey,Opened his watry Files, and cleared the pathless way. The Waves retreated, and erected stood,As fear and wonder had benumed the Flood. Then Front to Front they kept their Line unmoved,And those that crowd behind, they backwards shoved. Like a long Ridge of Crystal Hills they rose,And the low Wonders of the deep disclose. so valiant Arthur prest upon the Foe,And so their Troops retired, and let the Conqueror thro. Now he advanced to Tollo's foremost Band,Where mighty Fingal and Dolavian stand;Both which he slew, next valiant Duncan falls,While he in vain for Help on Tollo calls. And now on every side the saxon HostBegan to fly, and yield the Battel lost. Only King Tollo with enormous RageBreaks thro' the Troops, Prince Arthur to engage. Mean time the Prince of Hell stood full of Care,And feared th' Event of this unequal War. To save the saxon squadrons which remain,Whereof such Numbers lay already slain,And to prevent Tollo's impending Fate,Whose Arms the British Hero's could not mate. The conquering Britons fierce pursuit to stay,And once more Arthur's Triumphs to Delay,By heaven's Permission, causes to ariseA dreadful Tempest in the troubled skies. The blustring Powers, and Demons of the Air,straight at his summons to their Prince repair. To whom thus Lucifer:Aerial Powers, who my Commands obey,And in these Regions own my soveraign sway;Know, I intend to end this bloody strife,To part the Hosts, and guard King Tollo's Life. Go hasten then, each to his known Employ,And let your loudest storms the heavens annoy. swift, as your own projected Lightnings fly,And in a Moment trouble all the sky. The dusky Fiends obedient fly away,some fetch up misty stores to choak the Day. some Pitchy Clouds of stygian Fleeces made,And in their Bowels Trains of Brimstone laid,some ram in seeds of unripe Thunder some,With mighty Hailstones charge their hollow Womb. some fetch strong Winds, which on their Wings may bearThe heavy Tempest lab'ring thro' the Air. O'erspreading mists th' extinguished sunbeams drownDark Clouds o'er all the Black Horrizon frown,And hang their deep Hydropick Bellies down. Hoarse Thunder rolls, and Murm'ring try's its Voice,Preluding to the Tempest's dreadful Noise. Infernal Torches now the Fiends apply,And light the fiery seeds that hidden lie. The heaven's wide Frame outrageous Thunder shocks,Loud, as the mighty Crack of falling Rocks. The Cloudy Machines burst amidst the skies,And from their yawning Wounds exploded Lightning flies. Confusion fills the Air, Fire, Rain, and HailNow mingle Tempests, now by Turns prevail. No more the Britons, and the saxons strove,For that below, yields to the War above. The conquering Britons, to the Camp return,Their Loss in theirs, the vanquished saxons mourn. so when a summer Cloud the sky o'erspreads,The Bees that wander o'er the flowry Meads,Or to the Tops of lofty Mountains climb,To fetch the yellow spoils of od'rous Thyme,Forsake their Toil, and lab'ring thro' the Air,To their known Hives, with hasty Flight repair. All to their Cells returning from abroad,Depose their luscious Dew, and strutting Thighs unload. Perplext, and sad, the saxon Troops appear,And horribly they curst Prince Arthur's spear. They saw no saxon could his Arm withstand,And doubt Deliverance from King Tollo's Hand. When half of this uneasie Night was spent,To all the great Commanders Octa sent,To bring them quickly to his royal Tent. And first the summons they to Tollo bear,Who to equip himself did straight prepare. A Wolf grined horribly upon his Head,And o'er his brawny Back a Leopard's Hide was spread. He girds his mighty Fauchion to his side,Which hung across his Thigh, with fearful Pride. Frowning, and on the great Affair Intent,He straight to Octa's high Pavilion went. Next Mordred halting with his Wound, and lame,And by his massy spear supported, came. A Beaver's skin upon his Head he wore,And a fierce Tyger's his wide shoulders bore. A silver Belt, illustrious to behold,Held his broad sword, adorned with studs of Gold. Then Ella rose newly laid down to Rest,And buttoned on his rich embroidered Vest. O'er which a pompous scarlet Cloak he threw,Fastened with Golden Clasps, and lined with costly Blue. Then putting on his mighty sword, in HastTho lame, he to the Counsel sternly past. Then valiant Amades, and Chuline wentWith wife Pascentius to their Monarch's TentFollowed by Osred, sebert, and the restOf their chief Lords, who great Concern exprest:And now th' august Assembly filled apace,Where all the Leaders took their proper Place. Then their Attention Octa did demand,And leaning on his scepter with his Hand,He thus began, Princes, you see the FieldTo the victorious Britons still we yield. By sea, and Land we've felt their fatal Arms,And all our Realm trembles at their Alarms. Our Heaps of Dead the Field with Horrour crown,And seas of saxon Blood the Valley drown. All Albion's Isle resounds with dying Groans,White with her Rocks, but whiter with our Bones. Prince Arthur's sword the Field with Ruin spreads,Like storms, which from the Trees dishonoured HeadsTheir shady Leaves, and spreading Branches tear,Cover the Ground, and leave the Forrest bare. On us th' offended Gods severely frown,But on the British Arms look smiling down. VVhile we oppose the rapid Tide of Fate,VVe think to stop what we precipitate,And learn our Errour, at too dear a Rate. He said, the saxon Chiefs, who found their HostFeeble, and sunk by frequent Battels lost:Thinking their Arms unable to oppose,The rapid Course of their victorious Foes:Upon Pascentius straightway cast their Eyes,As one above the rest accounted wise,And who the King to Peace did still advise. Pascentius then began. Octa, the Counsel which at first I gaveFrom Arthur's Arms our threatened state to save;VVhat since has happened, shows was just and right:For who can meet the British Prince in Fight?Our sinking state, and hard Affairs demandA Remedy of Force, and near at Hand. He that in such a storm, would safely steer,Must have a Head that's steady, cool, and clear. 'The lab'ring ship on all sides feels dire shocks,Charybdis shuned, she's dashed on scylla's Rocks. 'Tis hard to give a Monarch Counsel whereOn either Hand such frightful shelves appear. statesmen, in such a Case as this debateHow best to save themselves, and not the state. But if my Judgment still I must declare,I would at any Price compose the War. And till a more effectual can be found,This as a safe Expedient I propound. sore with their Wounds, and sunk with ill success,The saxons strong Desires for Peace express. This to obtain, we must to Arthur sue,And the first Treaty, which we broke, renew. The Princess Ethelina's heavenly Charms,Are only stronger, than the Briton's Arms. she must be offered, as the Prince's Bride,This once prevailed, and must again be tried. But then you break the Promise, that you madeTo Tollo, who'll complain he is betraied. since hence to Peace, our chief Obstructions spring,I move that Arthur, and th' Albanian King,May by their single Arms the strife decide,And let the Princess be the Conquerour's Bride. If o'er the Britons we th' Advantage gain,And Arthur by th' Albanian King is slain. The Britons shall repass sabrina's Tide,And in their Rocks, and Hilly Lands abide. But all the Cities, Castles, and the Land,That lie on this side, Octa shall command. But if King Tollo slain by Arthur's sword,New Triumphs to the Briton shall afford;We'll meet no more their Armies in the Field,But all our Towns, and conquered Places yield. Those who shall ask it, shall be wasted o'er,To our old seats along the German shore:The Cantian Kingdom still we will retain,And in its Limits circumscribed remain. This, as the best Expedient, I propose,He said, the saxons murmured their Applause. Then Tollo answered with a haughty Air,Pleased with my Fate, I undertake the War. My sword and Arthur's shall the strife decide,And let the Princess be the Victor's Bride. This conquering Arm the saxon Realm shall guard,Repell the Foe, and win the bright Reward,For if the Foe does not my sword decline. The War is ended, with his Fall or mine. Th' Assembly rose, and back the Captains went,Praising King Tollo much, but feared th' Event. At the first opening of the tender Day,six Oratours King Octa sent awayTo Arthur's Camp, who introduced declare,The Measures taken to compose the War. The Challenge Arthur heard with great Delight,And readily accepts the single Fight. straight to the sacred Temples all repair,heaven to solicite with united Prayer,That Arthur in the Combate might succeed,And vanquished Tollo, by his Weapon bleed. With warmer Zeal and with more earnest Cries,The Britons never importuned the skies. A deep Concern at Heart they all exprest,And mighty Passions struggled in their Breast. For if the Prince fell in the Combat, allWell knew their unsupported state must fall. soon as the sun had streaked the skies with Light,Prince Arthur rose; and Armed himself for fight. Peices with silver studs his Legs encased,And Plates of Gold his warlike Thighs embraced. And on his Head he laced his burnished Helm,Whence flashing Brightness did the sight o'erwhelm. Like some Celestial Orb his blazing shield,Darted amazing Lustre thro' the Field. And then he girded to his Martial side,His faithful sword, so oft in Battel tried. Thus armed the Hero mounts his thundring steed,Nor Thrace, nor Greece can boast a nobler Breed. With his strong Arm he griped his trembling spear,His very Friends, tho pleased, yet seemed to fear. And as he spured his Courser, and advanced,Unsufferable splendour from his Armour glanced. As glorious Michael, when the Foe alarmsThe blissful Realms, clad in Celestial Arms,Bright as the sun, leads forth th' Angelick Host,To chase th' Invaders from the heavenly Coast,In such illustrious Arms the Prince was seen,His warlike Grace was such, and such his Godlike Mien. Mean time King Octa from his Camp proceeds,High in his Charriot drawn by milk white steeds. And by his side Tollo, appeared in sight,Compleatly armed, and coveting the Fight. His Coat of Mail was o'er his shoulders flung,And by his side his dreadful Fauchion hung. Like a high Beacon lighted in the Air,His Buckler flamed, denouncing horrid War. In his right Hand he shakes his pondrous Launce,And on his steed did to the Lists advance. The Marshals of the Field had markt our GroundFit for the Fight, and fixt high Pales around. Which with armed Troops, on either side were lined,Their spears stuck in the Ground, their shields reclined. On either side the Armies stood in sight,Drawn up, as they two were designed for Fight. Attended with his Heralds on the Place,Prince Arthur first appeared with Martial Grace. When Octa and his Priests advancing near,Raising his Voice that those around might hear. His Hand devoutly on his Breast, his EyesFixt in a solemn Manner on the skies;To ratifie the Treaty, thus he swore,Th 'Eternal Mind whom Christians do adore,The God of Truth I here to witness call,That if this Day by Tollo's Arms I fall,We will no more Hostilities repeat,But o'er sabrina's Waters will retreat. We will no more the saxon state molest,But in our Hills and snowy Mountains rest. But if we find this an auspicious Day,And by Heaven's Aid, my Arms shall Tollo slay;Then if the vanquished saxons shall restoreThe Towns and Lands, which we possest before,They in the Cantian Kingdom shall reside,And unmolested in those Bounds abide. Then did King Octa by an Altar stand,Raised with Green Turf, and on it laid his Hand. And thus his Idols he invoked. Irmansul God of Arms, and mighty Iove,
        Tuisco, Odin, all ye Powers above,And you green Gods, and blew-eied Goddesses,Who rule the spacious Empire of the seas. And you tremendous Powers, who all resort,At Pluto's summons, to th' Infernal Court:Ye rural Gods, who rule the Hills and Woods,Ye watry Powers, who dive beneath the Floods. By gloomy styx I swear, bear witness all,That if King Tollo does in Combate fall,The Treaty now agreed to, shall be kept,The Cantian Kingdom only we except,All other Lands, our once victorious sword,Won from the British Kings, shall be restored. He who shall Conquerour in the Field remain,shall for his Bride fair Ethelina gain. He said, and to confirm the Oath he swore,He drew his sword, that by his side he wore:And with its Point did his full Veins divide,And let out from his Arm, the Crimson Tide. A golden Bowl received the vital Flood,Which Octa took, and drank the flowing Blood. Arthur and Tollo now themselves prepare,By a brave Combate to decide the War. The Martials, Heralds, and the Fecial PriestsThe Ceremonies finished, clear the Lifts. Then the loud Trumpet's Clangour did invite,The mighty Warriours to begin the Fight. Both in their Hands grasping their pointed Launce,spur their hot steeds, and to the War advance. And now the Combatants approached so near,Their Voices raised, they might each other hear. Then Tollo cried aloudTill now distressed without a Friend or Home,In forraign Lands, you did an Exile roam,Here stop your Course, your soul mean time shall go,A wandring Exile to the shades below. I'll take off with this sword your gasping Head,And in your spoils, fair Ethelina wed. Were you brave Hector, or his braver Foe,Or Godlike Hercules, Ied stand your Blow. Did you advance, with Thunder in your Hand,Against your Bolts I would undaunted stand. But such a mighty Foe I need not fear,You bear not such a shield, nor such a spear. Oh! that bright Ethelina now stood by,To see her Lover, and my Rival dy. Thus boastful Tollo did his Choler vent,And thus in Air his empty Threats were spent. The pious Prince enraged, without Reply,shakes his long spear, and hastes to Victory. As when a roaming Lyon from a far,sees a strong Bull stand threat'ning furious War,Who flourishes his Horns, looks sowrly round,And hoarcely bellowing, traverses the Ground. For want of Foes, he does the Wood provoke,Runs his curled Head against the next tall Oak,Wishing a nobler Object of his stroke. The Lyon fired, regards him with Disdain,And to insult him scowrs along the Plain. so Arthur boyling with Heroic Rage,springs with a full Carrier, King Tollo to engage. Collected in himself th' Albanian stood,Like some tall, shady Pine, it self a Wood,Or a vast Cyclops wading thro' the Flood. Then Tollo first, Arthur advancing near,With all his Force casts his long Ashen spear. Which Arthur on his tempered Buckler took,While with the vast concern the Britons shook. Thro' the first Plate of Brass the Weapon went,But in the next its dying Force was spent. Then from his valiant Arm the Briton threw,His Javelin, singing thro' the Air it flew. The yielding Buckler did its Force obey,And thro' the Plates, and Hide it made its Way. Thro' the thin Joynts of steel the spear did fly,And wounded, as it past, his mighty Thigh. The Blood sprung thro' his Armour, from the Wound,And trickling down the Plate, distained the Ground. Then did King Tollo's second Weapon fly,Which broke within the Buckler's second Ply. The British Prince another Weapon threw,Which, Tollo stooping, o'er his shoulders flew. And falling went so deep upon the Ground,No Arm, of Force to draw it out, was found. These Weapons spent, to end the noble Fight,The furious Warriours from their steeds alight. And as they nimbly leapt unto the Ground,The most undaunted Chiefs that stood around,so fearful was the Chinck their Armour made,started, as Men surprized, and looked afraid. Then furious strokes on either side they deal,The ecchoing Air rings with the dreadful Peal. Pale with the vast Concern both Armies look,And for their Champion's Life with Terrour shook. so when two vig'rous stags, each of his HerdThe haughty Lord, thro' all the Forrest feared,Resolved to try which must in Combate yield,In all their Might advance across the Field;They nod their lofty Heads, and from a farFlourish their Horns, preluding to the War. The Combatants their threatning Head incline,And with their clashing Horns in Battel joyn. They rush to combate with amazing strokes,And their high Antlets meet with dreadful shocks. The mighty sound runs ratling o'er the Hills,And Eccho with the Fight the Valley fills. Retiring oft, the Warriours cease to push,But then with fiercer Rage to Battel rush. The trembling Herds at Distance gaze, and stayTo know the Conquerour, whom they must obey. No less concerned saxons, and Britons standTo see the Victor, who must both command. Now Tollo backwards shrinks, and panting stoodFaint with his Labour, and his Loss of Blood. The British Prince enraged to see the Fightso far prolonged, collecting all his Might,With double Fury on th' Albanian prest,And his bright sword high raised, upon his CrestDescended with so horrible a sway,It stuned the Foe, and took his sense away. He dropt his Arms, and giddy reeled about,The joyful Britons raise a mighty shout. Arthur on fire, lets not th' Advantage go,But stepping forward with a back hand BlowDrawn with prodigious strength, from side to sideDid his wide Throat, and spouting Veins divide. A crimson River gushing from the Wound,Ran down his burnished Armour to the Ground. Reeling and tott'ring for a While he stood,And from his stomack vomits clotted Blood. Then down he fell, the Field beneath, and allThe saxon Army tremble at his Fall:Groveling in Death, and smeared with Gore he lay,And his dim Eyes scarcely admit the Day. Rolling in Dust his wounded Body bled,Away his soul with Indignation fled. Convulsed and quivering for a while he fetchtA dreadful Groan, and breathless out he stretcht. As when a Whirlwind with outrageous ForceO'erturns a lofty Oak, that stops its Course,Its Roots torn up, the Tree's caught from the Ground,And with the furious Eddy carried round:Then falling from the sky, his stately Head,And shady Limbs, the groaning Hill o'erspread. so by Prince Arthur's Arms, King Tollo slain,Fell down, and lay extended on the Plain. FINIs"
