"","x"
"1","Tyrannicall-Government
ANATOMIZED:
OR,
A DIsCOVRsE
Concerning
EVIL-COUNCELLORs. BEING
The Life and Death of JOHN the Baptist. AND
Presented to the KINGs most Excellent
MAJEsTY by the Author. Die Martis, 30. Januarii, 1642IT is Ordered by the Committee of the
House of Commons concerning Printing,
That this Book be forthwith printed and published:
Iohn VVhite. London, Printed for JOHN FIELD, 16••. "
"2","The Collocutors and Complaynants, or,
Persons speaking. Malchus, Pharise. Gamaliel, Pharise. Iohn the Baptist. Chorus, or a company of Iewes. King Herod. The Queene Herodias. The Queens Daughter. Nuntius, or the Messenger. "
"3","The life and death
of JOHN the BAPTIsT. The first part. Malchus, Gamaliel, Rabines. Malchus. O This old wretched Age, the neighbouring bounds
of our last breath, and you unhappy Fates, long
life on us have you bestowed for this? or for
these uses: That we should behold our Temples
lewdly, cursedly defiled, our holy things prophaned,
our Country slaved, the Reliques of our
Fame (which none might enter) broken before
me, and the sacred gold rent from the posts: what ere the greedy
will of stern Gabinius could by Rapine gaine, or Anthonies luxurious
power exhaust, all's lost, and we have been a mocking stock
(which I abhorre to heare, much more to speake) to Cleopatra's
gluttonous desires: and lest we should not be in every part disgraced
and vilified, we now are brought under a cruell King, the
Nephews son of halfe Arabian Artipater, Iudaea serves an Idumaean
Tyrant, while an Arabian Lord in sion Reigns, Gods people
and Ierusalem, a man prophane and impious: yet in this distresse,
among so many wounds of raging chance, some sparks of
ancient honor did remain a pattern of our Countries Discipline:
such as it is, which by our foes themselves is to be reverenced, the

furious Victor, and no small number of his purpled Court, began
to dignifie the Jewish Lawe•. We w••h t•is h•pe •efresht, though
well neere tyred with misery, had hardly taken heart to re-advance
our heads, when out alas, a hainous matter which we never feared,
did suddenly arise a new Baptizer▪ whose Pa•entage is holy,
who was bred among strange worships, but by Nation ours, by
stock a Levite given unto God, even from his infant cradle, being
son of an High-Priest, and shortly to receive that dignity himself,
unlesse he chuse rather to taste false glories bitter fruit, then honors
harvest in due time to reape. He therefore keeping in the desert soyle deceives, with shew of
sanctity severe, the simple people, cloathed in skins of beasts, his
haire uncombed, and feeding savage like; by which delusions he
draws the lookes of all men towards him, the common sort being
poss•st with ignorant beliefe, that a new Prophet to the world is
sent; And now unto himselfe he hath reduced an Army of the vulgar
following him. Him only now the people all admire, leaving
their Cities, Noblemen and Kings honor and feare him, where he
past with pride through the madnesse of the multitude, new laws
gives like another Moses, cleansing crimes with water, and presumes
our ancient laws with new Rites to adulterate; and rends
•he Fathers with reproaches, to enjoy the peoples mad affection
with more ease, who give him gentle hearing; but if none himself
oppose against this theifes attempts, raging and ranging with
bold insolence. That sanctity throughout the world renowned will
soon expire, nay, it expireth now, or rather hath expired. Gam. Men of our calling must do nothing rashly, mildnesse becomes
milde Fathers; to young men, if through temerity they go
astray, a pardon may be given, but a fault by one of us committed,
no excuse to vaile it can pr•vaile; Be calme a while, this rage appease,
and let your sorrow slaked. Ma•ch. Then you Gamaliel (as it seems) approve this cursed
Caitiffs actions. Gam. Malchus, no, I neither do approve, nor yet condemn•,
before I know the matter that concerns this new-come Prophet,
who is not a man (so far as I can hear) so full of ill, nor to be so
opprest with publick hate. Malch. O stars, O Heaven, O Earth! that wicked wretch
wants not a Patron here, that can uphold his manners to be good. Gam. Who vice reproves, good manners teaching, leads the
way himself, which unto others plainly he directs, can you perswade
me that this man is naught?Malch. He that our Laws contemnes, new sects doth teach,
besides new Ritts, reviles our Magistrates, and our high Priests
with calumny pursues, can you perswade me that this man is
good?Gam. If we were equally against our selves Judges austere, and
milder towards others, then we are oftentimes, our heynous crimes
would lye more open unto publike view and sharpe reproaches,
howsoever we flatter our selves and are proclaimed bles•, reputed
by the common people, saints, chast, pious, and upright, but of
us all, none from t•e greatest fault was ever free,Malch:Gamaliel,
that these things may be true, is•t lawfull for a vulgar man to
rayle against a Prelate? Let the people hear, yielding obedience
and sober live, refuse no reyns by him upon them cast, he can reduce
the vulgar if they are to the right way, let him be as a law unto
himselfe, but if in ought he chance to go astray, the wicked,
God doth see and sharply punish. Gam. And do you conceive this Law is j•st?Malch. I do indeed. Gam. And why? blind ignorance and want of skill. Malch. Because rashnesse and error commonly are found as
proper and peculiar to the vulgar. Gam. He that to Prin•es wisdom gives not place, is often taken
from the vulgar thrung. Malch. But give we place then in this chair to shepheards. Gam. Moses a shepheard was, and David too. Malch. They were taught all things by the spirit of God. Gam. He that taught them can also tutor this. Malch. Will God instruct him, and relinquish us?Gam. God, neither scepter, parents, noble stock, beauty, nor
Kingly riches doth respect, but hearts that no contagion of deceit,
of lust, or cruelty doth once pollute; The holy spirit in this
Temple rests. Malch. surely Gamaliel (to confesse a truth) you seeme to
me of •ate by your opinion, a plain approver of that wicked sec•;
I can no longer smother what I think, seeing you do such things
as are unworthy both of your Ancestors and of your selfe, you
that of all the rest ought to defend, do chiefly our authority offend,
and that in favour of a mad young man: For Gods sake tell
me, Whats your tryalls hope, what profit do you seeke to get by
this? Perhaps hee'l give you honor or great wealth, who •tterly
destroyes our orders, honor, and labours to undoe us. Gam. Truely Malchus, you shoot far from the marke, that you
suppose, we can defend our dignity with pride and arrogancy,
or with strength of Arms, our parents were not by such means advanced. Malch. Our ancient Laws and Orders more bec•me us that
are ancient, and let each one live according to the manner of
his time. Gam. But rather good things good men still become. Malch. If wee had any of our fathers spirit. Gam. Our fathers manners should our lives direct. Malch. This wicked fellow by a speedy death not threatnings
had beene punished. Gam. •or our order, cruelty is unmeet. Malch. Whats done for God, holy and pious is. Gam. To put to death without desert, is impious piety. Malch. Deserves not he to dye, that all subverts?Gam. If he transgresse, why do you not confute him in publicke
view with arguments and reasons? Why do you not shew there
your light of wit? you being expert, learned, and so old, set upon
one thats rude, unlearned, so young to the right way perhaps you
may reduce him, and glory to your selfe, mongst all men gain. Malch. That wound is never to be gently cur•d, but with
•ord, sword, and fire, or if you know any thing more to •ormenting. Gam. Be he such as you expresse him, or worse if you will, yet
one thing to your selfe you ought to give: that first you freely
and in gentle wise admonish him, least any one do think, that you
would rather cast him headlong down, doubtfull of heaven then
extend your hand to save him falling; It concernes you much,

that all your Enemies may understand, your will is good to save
all, none destroy, but such a one as with a mind perverse precipitates
himselfe: one thing at least I crave ere you by wrath be
further drawn, consider by this obstinate condition what you
may gaine. Malch. Why this, confound a foe, comfort the good, and
terrifie the shamelesse, confirm the wavering mind, and with this
blood our Countries Laws establish. Gam. Rather this you shall obtaine, to be accounted one, that
with all power of tyranny hath romed, untill you did a holy man
confound, one whom by reason you could not convince. Malch. Then let him bee as holy as he will and grave, Gods
spirit doth not him direct, who does neglect the Fathers ancient
Rules, and seeing no redresse with you I find, I'le seeke the Kings
assistance against Ruine. Chorus. Gamaliel in my judgement councells well, obey him
therefore; but I speak in vain, since wrath, the enemy of Gods advise,
darkens his minds cleer sight, who stops his ears to wholsome
admonitions. Gam. Hee's gone in wrath and swelling with disdain; for my
part, what was lawfull, to my power I earnestly advised him with
mild words, endeavouring to asswage his raging spirits: I gave
him faithfull counsell, but so far is he ingrate from giving any
thanks, that he even hates me for my good desert. such is the
common course, & a great fault in our degree is this, that we deceive
with shew of sanctitie, the common sort, that safely we Gods precepts
may despise; but if against our customes ought they dare, we
practise to subvert them with our gold, or witnesses suborned, and
cut them off by secret poyson, filling Herods ears with feigned utterance,
what our mind offends, revenging with false rumors,
while his breast with rage affected we the more incense, and arm
the violence of cruell wrath with calumnies. But Malchus now
is gone, unmindfull of all modesty, to Court, where he will feigne
the rising of new sects, deserting of the Fathers holy Rites, and
that the Kings Prerogative and power lyes open to derision▪ to
conclude, what ere he holds commodions to himself, masking his
wickednesse with honest names, if these he finds the King but little

move, another dart more cruell hee'l invent, hee'l cry the sworne
Bands that attend the King do secretly conspire, some wicked plot
preparing, they digest: Troops meet by night, their private
wealth by •actions to augment, these he will feign or worse into
his •ars, these poysons of his wit he will instill. And this in Princes
is a common fault, gently to hearken unto secret Tell-tales,
whereby what is most cruell, though but feigned, they easily beleeve,
and feign vain fears unto themselves, pursuing the light
ayre of moveable Report, where he that gives faithfull advertisement
is holden dull, torped and •merous: We change the name
of quondam vertue now, now not adorued with any vertue, but
with glorious titles proudly preferrd the Vulgar we beguile. As for this Prophet, with my soule I wish our Order with more
modesty and wisdom, and would bear themselves, if hither he be
sent by •ods appointment, there's no power of man that can withstand
him, but if he devise mischief by fraud concealed, with his
sword hee'l soon confound himself, •et every man interprete as his
own condition guides him: If any here my sentence do allow, his
hands he may keep cleer of guiltlesse bloud: Nor let us be profuse
of holy blood, least those examples that in cruell sort wee
make for others, afterwards return on our own heads▪ dwells not
in Herods heart immanitie enough, unlesse his rage by firebrands
added to his wrath, increase?Cho:O what a night of darkenesse doth possesse the minds of
mortalls! what Cymerian 
           •ave do we inhabite, while this brittle
life doth swiftly fleet away?False mod•sty doth skreen the brazen face, pieties vale the impious
doth conceale, Litigious men peace in their looks do feigne,
and the decei•full, veritie in words: The Vissage where sad gravity
did dwell, the only symbole of a modest life, now turnes to
cruelty with boyling wra•h, and healdong estautes with furious
•its. Even as the vapours of hot Et•a's Furnace with a swift rolling
turnes the stones about or into embers, flames Vesveus burn: so the
blind fury of revenge excites this Malchus on a guiltlesse man to
fall, and falsly to accuse poor naked truth. 
Oh thou desire of glory, swo•n with pride, mother of •o great mischiefe,
glittering praise of goodnesse coloured with a shew divine; when the minds
Kingdom thou hast once possest, with flattering poison thou inchauntst our
thoughts, and (reason bani•ht) thou disturbst the Court, the Court within
us; Piety and truth, with shamefa•tnesse and faith, are fled from thee: Faith
of the better Age a common Guest, hath lastly left the vice-dishonored earth. If there were any Artist that could set (the foreheads clouds removed. )
our cares to sight (the brest being made transparent) and disclose our minds
dark inner parts you might perceive monsters there varied into wondrous
forms, and those all stabled in a little Cell, being more than in remote and
forreign parts Nilus and Ganges beare, or all the births that Affrick•
           yeelds,
with furious portents, and those that hored Caucasus affords in his darke
Dens; the cruell Tygers rage would not be wanting there, nor the fierce
wildnesse of the deep shining yellow Lyonesse, nor the dire gluttony of ranging
Wolves, whose appetites no slaughter can asswage, nor the fell Basalisk
with poisoning breath, or stinging Aspe that brings long lasting ••eepe, or
scorpion dreaded for his hooky tayle, or Crocodile whose voice with feigned
tears so sound through the seaweeds, nor the Foxes wiles, or the Hyenaes
•alse play. Counter feit piety doth often cloak mercilesse Tyrants, and the guarded
stol•impiou• natures; in a homely weed under the Cottage shadow of a
swain vertue obscured, lyes nor sells her selfe for haughty titles, laughing as
in scorn at the mad tumults of our Justice-Courts, and the applause of common
peoples breath, nor Client like sits waiting at the doore of a great Patron,
but doth passe away the silent Ages of her blessed life in rurall privacy,
being unto none saving her selfe, or but few others known. The second Part. Queen, Herod. Queen. MY Lord, you live secure, and feele not how your Kingly
power debayes, nor yet discern like one thats blinde, what
snares are daily set to ruine you; for if that vulgar Preacher breath but anoyeare
bonds, prison, crosse, in vain you then may threaten, proudly now his
forces he surveyes, your persons Guard his followers obscure. Her. What danger fear you from th'unarmed root. Qu. If private Conventicl•s you permit, how can you sleep secure?Her. But he instructs those that run to him of their own accord. Qu. A wide spread Faction we should feare the more. Her. His sanctit• confutes that crimination. Qu. This vaile doth cover detestable Acts. Her. Of purpled Rulers we may stand in dread. Qu. And fear the fraud of gravest hypocrites. Her. He that is helplesse, armlesse, that alayes his thirst with water

takes his food in woods, his lodging on the grasse; oh what deceit can he intend
a serpent!Qu. His attire, his meat and drinke you see, but in his brest you see not
what he bears. Her. A Kings estate is miserable, if he stand in awe of those that are in
misery. Qu. If a King through fond security become a prey, he is most miserable. Her. How then may a King remain in safety?Qu. What withstands his pleasant queit, let him soon extirp. Her. surely a Tyrant and a King thats good, differ in this; the one his
foes preserves, the other is a foe to them he Rules. Qu. Either is hard, to perish or destroy; but it is better, if make choice
he must, an enemy to destroy. Her. Where no necessity the one requires, either is miserable. Qu. should you in such a tumult use no rigour, the wavering vulgars
fury being raised the Princes, Laws, Religion, Power contemned, is to the
base Plebeans made a scorn; Take heed, that lenities deceitfull looks draw
not your minde from equity, what seems a farre off mildnesse, to one neere
at hand will be the greatest wildnesse; while you spare one Factious man
thats desperately bad, you seeke to ruine all: whom he to arm against your
life endeavours day and night, what needs must be at length feign to bee
done; that the inconstant people are stired up to arms, that every where they
all things burn, with woefull War, and Villages left wasted, our Virgins ravished
and our Cities fire, and with ambigous fortune Armies joyned. When
Liberty shall burst the reynes of Laws, that clemency too late you'l then condemne. 
And here behold that plague and mischiefs head, This is that high
Reformer, question him, and if I do not erre, you shall hear from him much
more than fame hath publis•t: nor do I mervaile that there can be some that
scorn your Government, when you your selfe the wicked sort through lenity
provoke. Her. When a good King is able to do much, his power he ought to moderate. Qu. say you so? This upstart now will moderate your scepter, and you
must rule according to his will, but if you had the spirit of a King—Her. But get thee gone, and leave these things to me. Qu. And so I will, lest you raile at me as you did before: when Queens
yeeld much to men of basest kinde, what hope of equity will cherish others. Herod. Iohn. Chorus. Ha. is she gone? shee is, now let me tell thee; there's nothing that may
move thee, or that strange thou mayest conceive, if an offended woman, rich,
noble, potent, finally a Queen, do entertain more anger then is meet. Even
thou thy self mayest witnesse it the best how much thy welfare I have still regarded;
for all the people hate thee, and require thee as guilty to be punshed,

our Priests murmur, our Nobles grieve, and surely what it is that may increase
the common sorts complaint, I will relate in brief: In thy Orations,
thou all the Orders openly revilest, the vulgar sort in our old Laws unskilled,
thou cunningly receivest the deadly venime of a new sect dispersing,
and impairest with speeches turbulent, our regall state, with the Republick
peace, prohibiting our men of War their Captain to obey, the people
Cesar, while thou promisest new Kingdoms to the vulgar, and to free
them of their newforraign yok, andstir'st them up with a vain confidence, nor
doest permit this our Rebellious Nation to rest: And madmen like us, as if
we had endured but small calamity, thou reinsittest the Romanes a new War
against us to make; Nor doubt I what thou darest do being absent, seing
thou openly dost me upbraid with an unlawfull marriage, and would heape
the peoples hate upon me, and attempt'st all that thou canst to make my brother
raise unnaturall War against mee: And as if thou hadst done little mischief:
for the safety of all alike presuming to do all things, nowagainst Heaven
thou preparest to fi•ht; those holy Rites attempting to abolish, wherewith
this Kingdom hitherto hath stood: These things the people grudge at,
and complaine that I am flow to vindicate and right their Countries Lawes,
yet have I shewn my self in nothing harsh to thee, but all the favour that a benevolent
and friendly Judge can shew thee, thou shallt plenteously receive;
For no Assyrian or Aegyptian Father hath me begotten a blood-thirsty Tyrant,
who had with you own Country, parent, nurse, I mean the spatious
Earth, so that as oft as any of the meanest People perish, I lose me thinkes a
member of my selfe even from this body torn; Nor thou shalt find of Herod
an upright and gentle Judge: If thou be able falsly to con•ute what other
things are layd unto thy charge, All thou hast uttered against me and mine I
freely pardon, heartily remit, and thou shalt understand that I neglect mine
own and prosecute the publicke wrong, the people being witnesse: and I wish
thou mayest so cleer thy self of other crimes, that no occasion of severity be
left me through thy innocency. Cho:Go forwards to be gracious in this, And thou shalt live renowned
to thy successors, not in Gold-ore or Military bands: And thinke thy Kingdom
safe, as those atchieved by equity, which charity and faith do evermore
defend. Iohn. He unto whom the Almighty doth committ a Kingdoms Rule ought
many things to hear, but all things that he heareth to believe, it is not necessary,
envy, feare, griefe, lucre, favour, oft suppresse the truth. If any of the
people or the fathers thinke I have uttered any thing against him in rigorous
manner, or ungently rayled, Tis necessary, ere he mee accuse, that he examine
his own course of life; This hath been ever my care and custome publick offences
to reproove in publicke, nothing in private have I done or taught,
Blind lurking holes I seek not, neither tax men but their v•ces, when the souldiers
asked me how I could serve at once the King and God: To ravish •ruse

violence, abuse or •ircu•vent the simple with deceit, I utt•rly forbad
•hem: To compose their sensuall desires, I gave them charge, according to
the measure of their meanes: nor any hope of new things do I preach, but only
that which you believe with me, out of the ancient Prophets; i•h meane
time, none of so many thousand is produced, that through my doctrine hath
contemned his Prince. Those matters whether by uncertain fame to you related,
or by hood winkt wrath still raging head-long with desire to hurt, falsly
invented, naked verity will by it self and easily confute. How piously I prize
the holy Rites and ancient institutions, theres no sign more certain then the
impeacher of my crimes, because he comes not forth to publick view, where
feigned things be easily beleeved, he secretly may murmure. For my denying
that your Brothers wife is yours by right consider with your self whether you
ought to serve your carnall will, rather then your Creator, and I wish all men
devoted to the love of Kings would be in mind alike, to mention things that
are both profitable, true, and good, rather then whas are pleasant and will
soon turne to their damage; Then against how many mischiefs and molestations
would the Gate or entrance be shut up, If heretofore freely and truely
I have spoken ought, do you that in your wayes are just and good, (as Equities
defenders are obliged) receive it in good part, and set these bounds to
your high potency which are prescribed you by the Laws measure: For what
Law you hold here against others, God the King supream against you and others
of your place retains: Then whatsoever you shall judge of me, beleeve
that God will judge the same of you. Her:When thou shalt come to Heaven speak heavenly things, but whi•e
thou livest on earth, earths Laws abide. Iohn. To earthly Kingdoms reverence I bear, and Kings obey, but those
eternall Kingdoms I hold my Country and their King adore. Her:The matter even it selfe i•structs thee how Kings to obey, that doest
desire a King such Laws as thou ordeinest to obey. Iohn. If I may Laws ordeine, I would proclaime to Kings, their people
should obedience yield, and Kings to God. Her:Thou hast enough contended bear him hence, the case is doubtfull,
nought can I determine, untill all things more ceartainly appear. Chor. Who doth conceive that by a Tyrants words the close or hidden
meaning of his mind, he can perceive let him well underdand, he trusts into a
foule deceitfull glasse, God prosper and turne all things to the best, what
my soule fears, it trembles to divine. Her. How wretched and how overwhelmed with care a Kings condition
is, no tongue of man, or politique Oration can expresse, nor any thoughts attain;
the vulgar hold us only free and happy, that are vexed with terror, and
with poverty besieged, with miserable servitude oppre•t: the people, whatsoever
they desire, or love or dread, they freely dare confesse, and modest
riches without fear en•oy: But when we walke abroad we must assume an

honest persons habit, and are forced to promise courteously with gracious
lookes, our anger to defer and hide our hate, till a fit season, chiefly then to
threat, when greatest cause of fear our mindes torments: A modest Prince
the people do desp•e, one rigerous they hate, the wavering vulgar we are
compelled to serve, and can command nothing to our desire. This new-come
Prophet if I cut off, I shall offend the people, if I preserve him, for my Royall
state I little do provide, what shall I do then? I must regard my Kingdom,
none so neer as I am to my selfe, if I must serve the people for a scepter,
what's more foolish then, while thou seekest to please the vulgar sort to
cast away a Kingdom? Joy and wrath the people rashly take, and rashly
leave: tis now my resolution to conffrm the Royall power that I hold, with
blood: the vulgar will be easily appeased. If by my sufferance this evill creep
a little further, twill be past redresse, why he forsooth durst tell me to my
teeth my marriage was unchast, and if he scape for this unpunished, his audacious
will there will not rest, but scepters to his Laws then he will force to
stoop, then he will cast his Captives into chaynes, then he will seeke to rule,
and not be ruled, give Laws to Kings, and turne all upside down, we must
apply unto a g•owing evill speedy cure, flames rising must be quenched ere
they increase. By suffering old injuries, we raise fresh contumelies, new reproachfull
termes, If with the peoples favour I may gaine some satisfaction
by this pun•shment, to wyn their favour I will not neglect: But if perverse
against me they persist, What Malchus of our Laws may freely bable, what
curious questions he may vainly cast with intricate debate, that, I conceive,
concernes not me, and let the people know, this one Law to be kept, that
they may think, All things to me are lawfull without Law. Chor. Oh thou Creator of this spatious Orbe, whose nod makes all things
tremble, Heaven adorned with glittering stars, Earth variously deckt with
flourishing Array, and seas that swell with raging violent motions, ebbes and
flouds: Hath not lowd flame that knew the former age, brought to our hearing
thy then famous acts? When thou by vigor of thy puissant arme, proud
Kingdoms boasting of their, gold and wealth hast utterly abolished and exextirped
us in their land to plant, their land to prepard, neither by counsell, strength, nor
Arms of ours. But Heavens Almighty favour safely brought us through the fierce Armies,
art not thou the King of 〈…〉? a•t not thou the God of the Iews Nation, by whose
guiding hand (our enemies destroyd) their treacherous Tents we trampled under foot, con
           •iding
not in our own strength and com•ge; but in thee our most auspicious Leader, bringing
spoyles and triumph to our Countrey• wilt thou now being once our Father, utterly
for sake the people whom thou lovest? Are we now left a f•ble for our foes? Religion
lyes with Piety despised; in purpled Courts, fraud is predomanant; the holy flocke yeild
as a sacrifice their pious necks to the •ell Axe, our Prophets by the sword perish; our Tyrant
enemies rejoi•e in our laments, and they they the Kingdom rule un•er pretext of piety
and zeale, though punishment descr•ing whilest they smart, whose worth deserves a Kingdome. 
Ri•e, O Lord, and helpe thy people, To our Adversaries shew thy sel•e such as
Thee our Fathers saw in the Red-sea, confounding Pharao•s Hoast; such as the Prophets
boy did thee behold, when to disperse the flames throughout the Camp. Thou to thy fiery
Horses gavest the re•gns. The must of error that obscures the light of humane understanding

overwhelmed with a darke cloud: O Lord: now drive away, let both the Land warmd
with the rising sun, and that which. doth it in down-going view, confesse that onely thou
c•nst all things do. The third Part. MALCHUs. THus truly is the state of humane things, That if God grant that we should have our
wish, we are to seeke, uncertain what to chuse, what to refuse; we covet honor, we•lth,
Dominion, Heritage for us and ours, which having our desire, we often lose bondage,
imprisonment, and shamefull flight unto our foes we wish, which oft beget their greatest
glory, to our bitter shame: And surely I have learnd, that this is true (not go to fetch examples
a farre off) by mine own dang•r; for when this Baptizer, living remote from•s
on Mountaine tops, bewitched and d•ew with him the rediculous rout; I onely (the rest
idle) did defend the Pharisees, Authority and worth: nor did I cease alwayes and means
to try, untill this Adversaries guilty hands were strongly bound, and in the common Goal,
his insolence allayed, and the whole Court his crimes had knowledge of by my redort; and
and yet his c••mes imprisonment, and bonds, nought in my thog•hts avail, the peoples hearts
the horrid power of this hellish plague hath so possest, and every one hath quast the deadly
poyson, that they all bewaile his dangerous condition, yeilding honor unto his •minent
noworthy death. But wherescere he can, let MALCHUs go, their curse• h: cannot
scape, at me they point, on me they looke with a Malignant eye, doing all favours to that
wicked wretch, who hath berest us of all differences in our a••airs and orders, keeping watch
before the Prison. surely nothing now in misery exceeds us, that devote our selves (all other
businesse set apart) unto the peoples profit; he that slaves himselfe to them, may easily
perceive, that such his favour he hath ill bestowed, as upon those that being ill inclined
th•ough ••nate malice, ever use to bear toward the •ad, good will, and to-contemne the chiefest
persons of a Common-weale. Oh whither shall I go? how first complain, where
shall my anger principally light? whom shall I first assist? the ungodly crew love that false
Prophet, and the Rab••es murmure, the King connives, the Nobles him neglect! I only
with these shoulders do support, even with these, our Countries falling Rites, none lending
me a hand; why then do I, and none but I, the common change bewayle? shall I put
o•f my office, and forsake our Orders, dignity, with all our lawes and sacred Rites, and suffer
my poor selfe to be a laughing-stock to those that hate me? Ile do it, ile suffer it, I indeed
I will; for what else •m I do? shall I alone bear that my self, which all refuse to
bear? and lay my self fo•th to the publike ruine? God keep his own, •ith now the world is
such, that every man must loc• unto himself: Ile do the like, and if the commonwealth
I rule amisse, then let the ruine light upon my head; those that now while I stand, favour
me most, will first when I am falne, assault me with their heels; if well I rule, and do ill
place my favour, I shall get nothing but envy: now too lat• I like GAMALI•s advise,
unlesse perhaps, no man from error can return too late; I had rather they should seeke me
constant here, than when all is done, my indiscretion punish: what seemeth good to each
man, let him think Ile rid my selfe of troubles, and repaire my favour with this Prophet;
nor will he being a simple hearted man reject me; But If I finde him towards me pe•ver•e,
Ile set all engines, lest the people think he perisht by my craft; if they to me be reconciled,
the businesse will not fall on every side, and here I think he comes, he comes indeed, see
what a company follows the wicked wretch, and we the while sit in the Cities heart amongst
our Chairs, alone and 〈◊〉 but I first w•ll hear what this grand Mr. utters. IOHN. O thou that 〈◊〉 things dost make voyd, judge and rule what ere the ayre in its loose
b•some bears, what ere the 〈◊〉 can precreate, •r sea within its waters nourish; thee there
God all do acknowledge, 〈◊〉; thee alone finde the•r creation; in a constant way thy
laws once given, freely they ob•y; At thy command the spring with flowers paints the sert•le
fields, and fruits the summer yeilds, Autumne, pure wine abundantly aff••ds, and winter
with white frost the 〈◊〉 attires, the crooked Ri•ers rolle into the sea huge heaps of waters,

the sea ebs and flows, the silver Moon illuminates the night, the golden
sun the day, and views this orb with never r•sting brightnesse; To conclude,
ther's nothing whatsoere in heaven or earth that does not willingly its king
obey, its maker love. and towards him declare with all the service possibly it
can its good affection, but only man; Man who is bound far more than all the
rest Gods precepts to delight in and obey, only contemnes them, and rejects
the reigns of laws divine; yea, into every sin precipitates himselfe, accounts
all just in his own strength, aud measures right by lust. Malch. Thy fair beginnings as yet well proceed. IohnNor do I so much wonder at the Gentiles, that through the world do
wander from the way, as at this people that themselves do boast to be Gods
heritage, yet raile at others, and cry them down as impious, when no Nation
on this globe seated whersoere the sun surveys the earth, lives more licentious. Mal. surely as yet he hath sayd no untruth. IohnNor is this only the light vulgars fault: The Levite in white v•sture
sh•ning far, and the Law writer of his knowledge proud, and you so reverend
for age mature by oblique error, are drawn out o'the way, widdowes
and orphans causes where you Judge, fall to the ground, the rich oppresse the
poore, both right and wrong are set at equall price. Mal. To hear this and be mute, I burst with rage. IohnBut you, the Rabines, that in holy gifts and knowledge fain all othes
to excell: And you the sacred dignity of Priests, and the chief Prelates of the
sacred Order, tyth all the hearbs born of our mother earth, Dill, Mint, Rue,
Garlick, Nettles, or green Hey, does not escape you. But if you should read
or teach the Prophets oracles, and shew the track or steps of your own holy
life, then your authority is stricken mute, then like dumb dogs that barke
not: here you fret and fume about your sheep-coats, but the Wolves which
of you drive away? the Wolves sayd I? you are the Wolves your selves that
flee your flocke, clothed with their Woo••, their milke dot slack your thirst,
their flesh your hunger: thus your selves you feed, but not your flock. Mal. Hence Concord with a mischiefe, can I brooke my Order any longer
to be checkt so insolently, with so base reproach? if God from Heaven
should send me with this charge, that these things I should hear such his command,
I rather would decline, than hear so much: I can endure no longer,
Ho sir, you master of mis-rule, is this doctrine yours? do you instruct the silly
people thus?IohnIf you be good, those things that I declare, nothing concern you. Mal. To traduce a Priest, does it belong to thee?IohnWhen I reprove a wicked man, I hold it spoken well. Mal. A young man ought his elders to obey. Iohn'Tis rather meet that all should God obey. Mal. Then dost thou speak these things by Gods command?Iohn. Truth doth command all men to speake the truth. Malch. It often profits to conceale the truth,Iohn. Profit with bad works joyned I nought account. Malch. Thou mayest call goodnesse what seemes bad to thee. Iohn. To see (when I am able to reduce them into the way) so many thousands
perish, it seems too bad. Malch. Thou able to reduce them, why are not we the feeders of the flock. Iohn. If it be all one both to feed and fley. Malch. Do thine own businesse and let ours alone,Iohn. My neighbours misery is likewise mine. Malch. I pray, who are you with such power endued? Are you that Christ
unto our Fathers promised?Iohn. I am not. Malch. Are you then a Prophet?Iohn. Neither. Malch. Are you Elias?
         Iohn. No. Malch. If none of these, nor Christ our hope, no Prophet nor Elias,
how darst thou be the author of new Baptisme? declare to me, whom shall
we say thou art?Iohn. I am a voice that one the Mountain tops afar off call and cry, Prepare
the way, make strieght your paths, the Lord is neer at hand, at whose first coming
shall the valleys rend, and Mountaines will be levyed with the plain, I in his name
the people do baptize, whose shoes I am not worthy to pull off, whom none doth know
thoug• he converse with you. Malch. What snares doth he invent, deluding me with circumstances, by
what miracle provest thou the authority which thus thou claimest?Iohn. And by what miracle thine canst thou prove? I may on the other
side thee also aske. Malch. How obstinate he is, bee't nere so much that thou concealest, yet
all of us do know, what makes thee mad: Thou surely doest desire to grow
up through our envy, thou wouldest gain glory and mighty riches by our
losse, and become potent by flagitious Acts nor doest deceive us but deceivst
thy selfe: neither wert thou the first that did attempt thus to beguile, yet
thee the last I wish, that may be duely punished, or that thou by my advise
thy mind wouldst rather change, that as thou hast made many go astray
through thee, they may into the way return, I have seen others that have
made a shew of sever holinesse by outward habit, whereby more easily they
might be thought of simple modest mind, but by such art, honor, and wealth
when once they had obtained, their dispositions by degrees appeared and
were discovered, for that pious course, well clokd before they openly contemned
and to their true conditions gave the Reigns. But if this way thou
aimest at honors hight, unskilfull men blinde ignorance deceives: By that
Crosse path, to glory none attain, unlesse experience that best instructs, and
age that such experience doth beget hath very much beguild mee, for thy fame
and livlyhood thou better mayst provide seeking rather safty than renown. Ioh. If I deliver truth and do what's right, wherefore should any bid
mee hold my peace, but if untruth, doe you that are so learned declare it
to the simple. Malch. Of these things, when thou shalt suffer punishment by
death, thou wilt repent thee. Ioh. Threaten that to Those, who feare to die. Mal. But if I live, ere long, I'le make thee muorn for this perversness,
and know what it is, the Elders to neglect the scribes, revile and vex
the Rabines with thy saucy Tongue, and haply feele, since thou hast
no regard to purchase friends, the power of old mens hate. Cho. He that himselfe prepares for secret stealth avoyds the light
and Murderers doe hate a burning Torch, that's conscious of their
crimes: A childe refuseth medicines intermixt with bitter wormwood▪
a cut wound abhorres the wholsome plaisters; and to him whose breast
the hidden evills of his soule torments, the truth is grievous, which doth
open lay his troubled heart and his bad minde bewray. But O you
Hypocrites in shew severe, whom lawlesse gaine with rugged brow delights
through error of the credulous common sort, how well so ever you
your thoughts conceale: And though the •oule sinke of your impious
minds be closely hid, your gnawing conscience argues your lurking
secrets, That tormenter inclosed within your Entrailes eats you up,
scourging with cruell stripes; O three times blest, and more is he, that
being pure within, becomes not guiltie to Domestick Iudges, nor by a
torturer within his heart, pent up unseene, endures perpetuall smart. The fourth part. Malchus, Chorus, Herodias. THere is no certain trusting to the King, his and the Common cause,
he hath betraied through foule ambition, while hee bends his
thoughts to please the people, and with favour hunts for ayrie applause;
Me, under shew of lenity, hee labours to subject unto the Co••ons
wrath, and with my perill would vindicate his wrongs, even prepared
to satisfie the people with my head, as if he saw, they heavily did beare
the Baptists death: But if to have the chiefe of their new Faction
flaine, they took it lightly; he subtily by the vulgar would be thought
with greatest glorie to have tane revenge. Thus to themselves Kings
of their Cities blood exhibite shewes by turnes, and make a sport of mutuall
slaughter, challenge to themselves, and publish, all by them was

only done, all whatsoever the vulgar Votes approve, and attribute our
labours industry to their owne prayse; but if the uncertain ayre of popular
•avour otherwise doe turn against their expectation and desire,
then on their Officers they cast the fault, and with a vile breath, their
own crime avert from innocent blood. One only now remaines a Partner
of our griefe, the Queen enraged, much like a Tyger of her Whelps
•erest, for that the Baptist had before the King accused the alliance of
her former Bed to be polluted, openly condemning the league of marriage
with a Brothers wife forbidden by the Law: now while the fire of
estuating wrath is fresh and hot; I will adde fire-brands to her troubled
thoughts, and feed them with fit language: But behold, how oppor
         •unely
she presents her selfe. Chor. Now poison comes to poison, flame to flame, now comes the
uttermost hazard. Malch. Noble Queen, our Nations glorious honour, who alone in
this so great a Kingdom doe deserve the highest place, God save you. Qu. And thee Malchus, the most religious Rabine: but why sad?Malch. For that which I suppose, your minde afflict. Qu. It may be so, but tell me, what is that?Malch. Doe you, to see your dignity despised, your royall names
authoritie so sacred throughout the world to be accounted vile, your
Crown made subject to the vulgars sco•ne, beare it with patience?Qu. What then shall I doe? teach me a remedy. Malch. Within your heart conceive so high a wrath, as may be worthy
of your Princely stock, your nuptiall bed and bosome. Qu. That's done already, I am burst with ire, weep and exclaime and
sharply reprehend, but no reliefe by wrath or teares I gaine, for all
my words are scattered by the winde. Mal. If with your husband a meet power you had, would he have born
your wrongs thus unrevenged? Or rather (may I speak more truly) his. Qu. Thou feest the people, how they be inclinde. Perhaps by this imprisonment
the King, The Baptists eager spirits think to •uaile, and to
allay his boldnesse?Malch. If you suppose imp•isonment and bonds, Can bridle the fierce
spirit of this thiefe, Your Highnesse erres; The rage of savage beasts,
That break their Dens and libertie regain, Is much more vehement them
theirs that range, In woods or desert Mountaines: Being freed, What
will not he attempt, Whose •etters now the people reveren•e, wrath once
•rovokd is kindled not a•laid, by taunts and scorn •he haughty spirit is
〈◊〉 f•ry bor•. Qu. This benefit should rather quench it quite, For that by royall
mildnesse he is free, Who by his own perversnesse might have perished. Mal. What your esteem a benefit, he holds an injury, and will more
oft remember, that you imprisoned him, then set him free. Qu. A rough and crabbed na•ure, thou relat'st. Malch. This in most men is naturally graffed, What favour you afford
is quickly lost, but what disfavor, no man doth forget, Good turnes
if born in memory with bad, All men well neere doe hate, Think that
the Baptist, as oft as he remembers your Desert, will not his crime forget,
and still believe, he is not loo•e from that, But in your thoughts, a
guilty man by soule ambi•ion freed, His paine remitted and you wrath
supprest but for a time. Qu. Yet courtesie prevailes to mitigate fierce natures. Malch. What with long use is hardned to the worst, We much more
easily may break then bend. Qu. What, doe you then advise me in this case?Malch. I'le shew you quickly, may I be believed. Qu. And what your counsell I will not delay. Malch. By seeking, agitating, and providing, (not fitting still) great
things are brought to passe. Qu. If seeking, agitating and providing nought may availe, 'tis better
to sit still, then to make work in vaine, and be to others a mocking stock. Malch. Where strength oft cannot, labour overcomes: a tall Oake
is not suddenly born down, nor does the warring Ram at one assault
overthrow the wals, what, often you suppose cannot be finished, is in time
dispatched• And importunity doth overcome, what reason sometimes
cannot; therefore seeke, solicite Herod, mingle teares with suite, wrath
with monitions, flattring words with brawles, work and intreat him
by what meanes you can, embracing all occasions every where; But if
by such plaine course you cannot speed, set snares and use deceit, for
mine own part, I am resolved untill, we finde successe in our desig•ments,
never to desi•t. Cho. Envie at length, and bitter grie•e incensed by impious F•ries,
on this pious Prophet have cas• the venome of their cruelty; from thence
fierce calum•ny and false de•raction joyned with fell cruelty, by cursed
fraud maintaine the battell, from hence harmlesse truth s•pported by no
guard, their threats contemnes. so many weapons doe one head assault;
so many su•tle drifts doe menace death to this young man, yet
like the hardy Holme, with North-east wi•ds assaulted, or a Rock, that's

           •eaten by the seas returning flood, •e with no fear is moved: O power
divine by all men to be hono•ed! candid Truth, whom neither force of
armes with trembling feare, nor fraud with all her projects can depell
from her firme station or unmoved estate. The grievous changes of unstable
fortune th•u only fearest not, and dost arme thy breast, obnoxious to
no chances, with a strength insuperable, and th•• impartiall hand of the
three Ladies, both of life and death for bidst us to begrieved at. But this
Prophet I am too slow to meet with, and relate the ruthful'st newes that
ever pierced his eares; yet see he stands before the prison doore. O thou
more holy then thy holy Parents, and th'only •cred it of old innocence!
Now for thy safetie in due time provide: The Rabine Malchus privately
intends deceit against thee, and King Herods wife, unwitting what
to doe is almost mad; The Courtiers flatter her, the King diffembles
what he conceives, and others twixt the teeth mutter, as those that dare
not speak the truth. Now is your finall perill. Ioh. And what's that?Cho. To escape death, you shall have much to doe. Ioh. Of eminent evills, I hold that the sum. Cho. Then which, none greater can a man befall. Ioh. As Tyrants power and deceit may cease, Times length may
bear it of its own accord, Which evill men do f•ar, good men do wish. Cho. But your own safety though you doe neglect, consider ours, and
that high spirit of yours a while remitting, sue for Herods mercy, and
make some friends, I hope he will not prove inexorable. Ioh. Doe not I doe this?Cho. That minde, God grant you. Ioh. To sue there's no need, for that minde •ath been long now with
my blood the Tyrant hasts to satisfie his wrath: Neither doe I rcsist, how
am I able rather to pacifie this bloody King, Then when the same things,
we will not and will. Cho. Good words I pray. Ioh. Why then report you thus, and thus advise me? ••y there are
two Kings, and they on both sides two things bid me doe that be repugnant,
The one King is earthly cruell and mischievous, who threatens
death, and hath a power my body to destroy; The other heavenly, mercifull
and milde, forbids me death to fear, and a reward proposeth to my
tourage, being able in flames inevitable to torment body and soule:
Now seeing these two Kings doe differ in command, give mee advice. 
wh•ther I ••all obey. Cho. If now •ccasion offerd you omir. Herod will never after be appeas's,
but God is ever easie to be pleased. Ioh. Gods anger, the more gently it doth rage, the more severely punishment
req•ires, being once moved. Cho. so, death which God would have all mortals feare, doe you
disdaine; the body with the soule, he in a mutuall bond of love hath knit,
lest unadvisedly some cause be offred, that may their holy fellowship
disjoyne. Ioh. Death I disdain nor, but by momentany. shun that erernall, and
the use of light which God hath given me, at his command I willingly
surrender. Cho. Will you then, being a Parent thus forsake your Orphans. Ioh. He who believes that God his Father is, shall never •eean Orphan. Cho. Can the teares of all your friends and kindred, whom you
leave unto a spightfull Tyrant move you nothing?Ioh. I leave them not, but they mee rather leave; for truly unto death
I run the way from the beginning of the world ordained, yea all men that
enioy the gift of life are born to die, and and wee are all restrained with one
con•ition, we tend all to death, and thither every day doth surely lead
us; God will have death a pennance to the bad, and to the good a Port,
the utmost bounds of a long iourney, and the Gate that leads to the
beginning of a longer life, that sends us rather born againe then dead. 
unto a glorious house of endlesse light; This is to man from prison a
relcase and a free passage to life wanting death; this way the whole flock
of the Fathers went, and all must follow them: what man is he, that having
once begun a race to run, desires not instantly the goale to gaine?
who, by night wandring in the stormy sea, refuseth shelter in a quiet
Port: What exile straying or'c the Desert Hills of a strange Countrey,
will bee discontent into his own to make a quick returne? I therefore
having overpast my way, suppose my selfe come to the very goale. Now
almost quitted from the sea of life, I view the Haven; from a forraign
soyle, home I return to see my heavenly father, that father who with
waters bounds the earth; invested earth with Heaven, he that rules the
certain courses of the moving sphear, who only all things made, guides
and preserves; to whom all things both quick and dead doe live even as
the flame it's Globes doth upwards roll, waters perpetually downw•rd•
fall, and all things do proceed to their own foment; my 〈◊〉 from heavendeso•nded,
labours now, a habitation in eternall light 〈◊〉 gaine with
〈1 page duplicate〉
           
           〈1 page duplicate〉
           
           
him that all things did create, whom not to see, is death, life to behold. 
If Caucasus rough-growne with hoary frost, the Ayre with Tempests
and the sea with stormes, and the whole Region with excessive heate
should all resist me, thither I would goe; to see so many Leaders, Prophers,
Kings, and pious Iudges, shall I not make way, though, with a
thousand deaths I be opposed? My spirit therefore from this body freed,
(this carnall prison) thither longs to flye, Even whither all the world betimes
or late shall be dispatched; For long life I conceive, is nothing, but
a gentle servitude in a hard painfull prison; O sweet death, that art of
heavy Toyles the sole Release, the Haven where all grief and trouble
cease, yet unto few men profitable known: Receive this shipwrackt body
in thy bosome, and bring it where eternall peace abides, whither no
impious violence, deceit, or ealumny shall follow it. Chor. O thou, thrice happy in this constancy of mind, O wretches
that we are, whom foolish feare debarres the sweet society and sight of
true felicity; Then since thou hold it what's needfull to be done, to thee
we wish eternall health and Farwell. How are the minds of men in
wayes unlike turned by discordant strite? of no offence he that is guilty,
doth not feare to dye, he that deserves to dye, if with vaine threats death
lightly greet him, with degenerate feare growes pale and trembles; As
the wicked wight shunnes death with heavy heart, so he that's good, of
death des••ous, thorough flames and flouds, o're deveous Rocks, all
dangers and E•••remes, freely precipitates his noble soule; For sundry
benefits to death belong to evill men unknowne, a happy life is Fates
Associate; neither doe the Good totally dye, but still their better part
contemnes the greedy fire and Mounts aloft to its own Country, Heaven;
Amongst the saints a certain Habitation doth attend soules that are
harmlesse, but the guilty G••ost, by snake haird Furies in a brimstone
lake, with greedy C•rberus his hungry I• wes, and Tan•alus with plenty
never filled, is evermore affrighted, gnawne and whipt; from hence
comes feare to evill men; from thence good hope to good men, even
while their mindes, appeating prodigall of brittle breath, hasten to prosecute
unfading life; O •yren! potent in bewitching baits, Life, that
abhorring goodnesse, dost affect what's fraudulent, and with thy flattering
might precludst the neighbout passage of our sinnes, and shutst
the Haven of perperuall peace; Where neither Martiall clamor doth affright,
nor Trumpets, with hoarse clangor doe 〈◊〉 nor pilling pi
           ••tes
terifie by •e•, nor cruell theives beset the silent grove, nor my one
made 〈…〉
           
           Felix, that alone with pleasant case he may himselfe besot the poore and
weakeore-whelmes with bloudy flaughter, neither he, that for vaine
Titles may exchange the lives of the rude Commons, but where simple
vertue with faire prosperity and tranquill rest possesseth all, and day can
never learne to end in darknesse, nor life ever know of any fi•erall, nor
Ioy of griefe. O thou sweet freindship of this carnall house, and thou too
lovely prison of our life; Now, now at length free from bewitching
Bonds the heaven-borne soule of man, which too unmindefull of her
owne Country joyfull in the yoke of her d•generate foule nuptiall bed,
and with somniferous I ethe• poysoning sloth inebriated, in thy lapthou
huggst. O thou deceitfull covering of day, into thy ashes vanishing returne,
That to her country Heaven the soule reslord, may fill it selfe with
becames of purest light. so from all sorrow shee shall be enlargd. And of all troubles thou by death dischargd. The Fifth part. The Queene. The Rabine Malchus hath my hopes beguilde, and Herod hath himself
with mee his Queene, (fearing the rumors of the babling crew)
through his owne yanity alike betrayd. Next, for my daughter, what
shee may effect, I greatly feare, the King did promise herat his great
banquet, that he would reward her danceing feates (which gave him
high content) with whatsoever shee of him should aske. Now unto
mee the girle hath past her word, that shee would aske of him none other
boone, but in a dish to have the Baptists head; And she will have it,
certainly shee will, If Horods mind be not to me unknown, The peoples
hatred I conceive on mee hee will divert, himselfe remaining free: And
I will beare it when the deed is done, and with willing heart: with joy of
my revenge weighing their hate, and with my gaine my staine, For women
to be cruell 'tis a shame, a shame indeed: unlesse more shame it were▪
that of such nature there are many Kings: But H•rod and my daughter
doe appeare, the ncor•r my hope is, my feare the 〈…〉
doth burne. Herod, Daughter, Queene. Her. And hast thou 〈◊〉 sufficiently 〈…〉
         Daught. 〈…〉 enough and royal. Her•. Never fear, things that are 〈◊〉 establish• with my faith and
before witnesses, aske halfe my kingdome, it shall be thine, no power
can avert him that is willing. Daugh. We shall shortly see what thing it i•. Hero. 'Tis certain, ask it now. Daugh. Your Kingdome sir I need not, which I deeme even as mine
own while you possesse the Crown, as if I held the scepter, but I aske a
thing b•th meet and easie. Hero. Thou thy selfe (not I) art in the fault thou hast it not. Daugh. Give me the Bapists head then in this Charger. Hero. What words are these by thee so rashly vented?Daugh. Not rashly neither. Hero. Thou demand'st a gift that ill become a Virgin. Daugh. To destroy an enemy is no uncomly deed. Hero. Is therefore he an enemy and worthy of a Kings wrath. Daugh. He's worthy of such wrath, who by his crimes deserves it. Hero. What redresse may I then purchase for the peoples hate?Daugh. The people must obey, and Kings command. Hero. 'Tis a Kings duty iust things to command. Daugh. Kings by commanding, may make those things iust which
were before uniust. Hero. But Kings commands, the Law doth moderate. Daugh. If that be right, which pleaseth Princes, then they rule the
Lawes, •ot the Lawes them. Hero. Then, for a King, a Tyrant the people will divulge me. Daugh. But your scepter keeps them in awe. Hero. It doth, and yet they'l babble. Daugh. such babbling sir, by punishment severe is brid•ed. Hero. Kingdomes are ill kept with feare,Daugh. And Kingdomes by impunity of crimes are easily subverted. Hero. Yet we finde, Kings are securest in the Cities faith. Daugh. It is not needfull that a King be loved, but feared. Hero. The cruell are or• whelmed with hate. Daugh. A gentle King the Vulgar do• despise. Qu. My Lord, all you have pleaded only tends, in my opinion, that
your promise past, in vaine may passe away, as yet me thinks, you do not
know the duties of a King; if th•se things which the common sort
•uppose hone•t and otherwise; you, for a King bel•eve to be the same,

King Herod erres. Brothers and sisters, fathers, sonnes in law, friends,
kindred, Citizens, and adverse parties, are bonds for poor men, but vaine
words for Kings; Let him that on his head once puts a Crowne, put
from him all degrees of Common duty; let him judge all things honest
that conduce to a Kings benefit, and hold no fact to be unseemly, that he
shall effect for his ow•e safety; on the King depends the peoples welfare;
Whosoever then to wards his Prince is pious, hath regard unto the pecples
welfare: shall the blood of this base fellow be so highly prizd, that
for anxietie by day nor night you can repose? release us of this feare, of
shame, your scepter, and of waste, your City, of rapine, Armes, and all
of civill warre? 'Tis fit by an example new and great, you should ordein
that Kingdomes to all men be sacred and inviolably stand; he has committed
an ungracious act, and by that let him perish; if no crime he has
committed let him seeke for me•: Give to your Queene her enemy, your
Queene if you neglect, yet as a King and father your promise to your
daughter see performd. Her. That Promise to performe with my best faith I am determind,
but if my advice, the •i•le doe aske more wisely shee will wish. Qu. But if shee aske my counsell, yours my Lord she may not change
or take. Her. Is't even so? should I so unadvised have made a vow? thus to a
foolish girle my faith obligd? and thus committed to a womans ha•ds
my Kingdome, safety, treasure, life, and death?Qu. Kings promises let certaine truth confirme. Her. Well. fith I may not, what I may deny againe I doe admonish
and intreat; let not wrath urge you to a bloudy act, unworthy of your
dignity and sex. Qu. Grant this, and leave all other things to us. Her. If of the Prophet you determi•e ought more rigourous, the perill,
blame, and shame is only yours. Qu. Now shall we vindicate our royall dignity in future times to be
of none derided, now I'l force the flubborne people to speake well of
Kings or learne it to their grief, and make them hold that all their Kings
commands they gladly must beare and obey though never so unjust. Chorus. Cho. O thou great City where King David reigned, you Towers of

wealthy salomon and salem, from whence against thy Prophets doth
arise a rage so terrible, and cruell thrist of blood so innocent? unhappy
thou, whom it becomes to be a pattern, rule, or helme of pi•ty, art now
become the only mirror of a wicked life: slaughter with violence, fraud,
theft and rapine, are thy chiefe exercise, no Godly zeale perswades the
Churchman to restraine his hands from horrible deceits, the people
now forsake the Lord, that all things did create, and worship Idols for
God, stone and wood, with Calves and Lambes their Altars are still
hot, and Images the workman doth adore, which hee himself hath
wrought, life he requires of a meere stock, and eloquence he craves of a
dumb stone, the rich intereats the poore, the Lo••• the servant, ancient
Rites are lost; The guiltlesse Prophets blood brings thee perforce to the
Tribunall of the greatest Iudge, The poore exclaime and widowes fill
the ayre with their complaints, for which the fearfull paine of just revenge
attends the•, unlesses • be in my divination much de•eived, for he•
that throwes down insolence and pride, (being the 〈◊〉 of Neaven,
Earth and seas) views from above th'oppressed peoples teares, their
heav•e prayers never doth forget, and speedily with a 〈◊〉 arme,
will punish thy unspeak•ble misdeeds: And over 〈◊〉 thy Towers,
where with thou swelst in silent victor-like, The barbarou foe, shall
all thy Buildings, Farmes and Lands possesse; The V•neyard Keeper
shall repaire his fruit to am Out 〈◊〉 Master; And where now salomons
Temple high towards Heaven do th•ise, • foraign ru•tick shall
his harvest make: O therefore, while Gods favour to rep••• affords
thee respit of thy ill pa•t life the sinnes 〈…〉 a move those
fruitlesse Images of foreigne Rites: Cu•b thy proph••e desire of
wretched wealth, and greedy thirsting for thy Brot••rs blood; But
thou wilt not repent thy ill past lif•, 〈…〉 Rites amove,
nor shun the greedy thirst of brothers blood, not one profane
desire of wretched wealth: A vicious P•ague shall therefore fe•se on
thee: Famine and warre, with barrennesse 〈◊〉 want, shall over whelm
thee, no• to be withstood; till thou be quitted with dese••ed blood. Nuncius, Cho••s. Nun. Where may I finde (O who will tell me where?) The Prophets
followers, that I may relate my heavy tydings. Ch•. stay your pace a while, 〈…〉 in

briefe, for what you beare I gladly would pertake. Nun. O but to know, what you to know desire, 'twill not delight
you. Cho. Yet your short abode think not too long, how ere the master
stands. Nun. Know you what boone the Daughter of our King hath beged of
him. Cho. To have the Prophets head given her in a Charger. Nun. And his head, even so shee hath obtaind. Cho. O horrible and most inhumane act; that heavenly vigour and
comly countenance by rigorous death is utterly decayed, and cruell
force with ever during silence hath shut up those lips that did abound
with sacred vertue. Nun. why weepe you? cease to poure out vaine complaints. Cho. When things to be bewaild I see and heare, why should I not
bewaile them?Nun. If death be to be bewaild, let us bewaile the dead, whose hopes
doe with their bodyes lye interrd; who doe not thinke, their short sleep
being done, their bones must rise again, and there remaines another
life, Let wretched men bewaile those that are dead, and only wretched
lived; None can be made by fortune miserable, though the like and
of mortall life betide the innocent and guilty, good and bad, no man shall
die ill, that hath lived well: If by the severall manners of their ends you
judge men miserable, you will thinke so many holy fathers to be such,
who dyed by fire, or water, sword or crosse, for him that dyed Defender
of the truth, both for Religion and his Countrey Lawes, in all
good things pursuing wee should pray, and wish to have like end or funerall day. Cho. Verily you have uttered nought amisse, but we whom errors
and opinion draw, foolish by flying death with death doe meet, the water
drowning whom the fire hath spard; And by the power of contagious
ayre, others are killd that have escaped the sea, And some, that in the
battell have survived, with sicknesse pyning die; God doth ordeine wee
may deferre, but not our deaths eschew;And daily wee delay our houres of death, yet withDiseases, danger, troubles, griefe:Long life is nothing, but a brittle chaine
Of diuturnall evill, which is knitWith a contiuall course, and speedy race,Even to the bounds of death: Not doe wee hold,(Bound with this bond) our selves to bee inthraledIn misery, but feare the fatall knife,With deeper horror then a servile life. FINIs. "
"4","The first part. Malchus, Gamaliel, Rabines. Malchus. O This old wretched Age, the neighbouring bounds
of our last breath, and you unhappy Fates, long
life on us have you bestowed for this? or for
these uses: That we should behold our Temples
lewdly, cursedly defiled, our holy things prophaned,
our Country slaved, the Reliques of our
Fame (which none might enter) broken before
me, and the sacred gold rent from the posts: what ere the greedy
will of stern Gabinius could by Rapine gaine, or Anthonies luxurious
power exhaust, all's lost, and we have been a mocking stock
(which I abhorre to heare, much more to speake) to Cleopatra's
gluttonous desires: and lest we should not be in every part disgraced
and vilified, we now are brought under a cruell King, the
Nephews son of halfe Arabian Artipater, Iudaea serves an Idumaean
Tyrant, while an Arabian Lord in sion Reigns, Gods people
and Ierusalem, a man prophane and impious: yet in this distresse,
among so many wounds of raging chance, some sparks of
ancient honor did remain a pattern of our Countries Discipline:
such as it is, which by our foes themselves is to be reverenced, the

furious Victor, and no small number of his purpled Court, began
to dignifie the Jewish Lawe•. We w••h t•is h•pe •efresht, though
well neere tyred with misery, had hardly taken heart to re-advance
our heads, when out alas, a hainous matter which we never feared,
did suddenly arise a new Baptizer▪ whose Pa•entage is holy,
who was bred among strange worships, but by Nation ours, by
stock a Levite given unto God, even from his infant cradle, being
son of an High-Priest, and shortly to receive that dignity himself,
unlesse he chuse rather to taste false glories bitter fruit, then honors
harvest in due time to reape. He therefore keeping in the desert soyle deceives, with shew of
sanctity severe, the simple people, cloathed in skins of beasts, his
haire uncombed, and feeding savage like; by which delusions he
draws the lookes of all men towards him, the common sort being
poss•st with ignorant beliefe, that a new Prophet to the world is
sent; And now unto himselfe he hath reduced an Army of the vulgar
following him. Him only now the people all admire, leaving
their Cities, Noblemen and Kings honor and feare him, where he
past with pride through the madnesse of the multitude, new laws
gives like another Moses, cleansing crimes with water, and presumes
our ancient laws with new Rites to adulterate; and rends
•he Fathers with reproaches, to enjoy the peoples mad affection
with more ease, who give him gentle hearing; but if none himself
oppose against this theifes attempts, raging and ranging with
bold insolence. That sanctity throughout the world renowned will
soon expire, nay, it expireth now, or rather hath expired. Gam. Men of our calling must do nothing rashly, mildnesse becomes
milde Fathers; to young men, if through temerity they go
astray, a pardon may be given, but a fault by one of us committed,
no excuse to vaile it can pr•vaile; Be calme a while, this rage appease,
and let your sorrow slaked. Ma•ch. Then you Gamaliel (as it seems) approve this cursed
Caitiffs actions. Gam. Malchus, no, I neither do approve, nor yet condemn•,
before I know the matter that concerns this new-come Prophet,
who is not a man (so far as I can hear) so full of ill, nor to be so
opprest with publick hate. Malch. O stars, O Heaven, O Earth! that wicked wretch
wants not a Patron here, that can uphold his manners to be good. Gam. Who vice reproves, good manners teaching, leads the
way himself, which unto others plainly he directs, can you perswade
me that this man is naught?Malch. He that our Laws contemnes, new sects doth teach,
besides new Ritts, reviles our Magistrates, and our high Priests
with calumny pursues, can you perswade me that this man is
good?Gam. If we were equally against our selves Judges austere, and
milder towards others, then we are oftentimes, our heynous crimes
would lye more open unto publike view and sharpe reproaches,
howsoever we flatter our selves and are proclaimed bles•, reputed
by the common people, saints, chast, pious, and upright, but of
us all, none from t•e greatest fault was ever free,Malch:Gamaliel,
that these things may be true, is•t lawfull for a vulgar man to
rayle against a Prelate? Let the people hear, yielding obedience
and sober live, refuse no reyns by him upon them cast, he can reduce
the vulgar if they are to the right way, let him be as a law unto
himselfe, but if in ought he chance to go astray, the wicked,
God doth see and sharply punish. Gam. And do you conceive this Law is j•st?Malch. I do indeed. Gam. And why? blind ignorance and want of skill. Malch. Because rashnesse and error commonly are found as
proper and peculiar to the vulgar. Gam. He that to Prin•es wisdom gives not place, is often taken
from the vulgar thrung. Malch. But give we place then in this chair to shepheards. Gam. Moses a shepheard was, and David too. Malch. They were taught all things by the spirit of God. Gam. He that taught them can also tutor this. Malch. Will God instruct him, and relinquish us?Gam. God, neither scepter, parents, noble stock, beauty, nor
Kingly riches doth respect, but hearts that no contagion of deceit,
of lust, or cruelty doth once pollute; The holy spirit in this
Temple rests. Malch. surely Gamaliel (to confesse a truth) you seeme to
me of •ate by your opinion, a plain approver of that wicked sec•;
I can no longer smother what I think, seeing you do such things
as are unworthy both of your Ancestors and of your selfe, you
that of all the rest ought to defend, do chiefly our authority offend,
and that in favour of a mad young man: For Gods sake tell
me, Whats your tryalls hope, what profit do you seeke to get by
this? Perhaps hee'l give you honor or great wealth, who •tterly
destroyes our orders, honor, and labours to undoe us. Gam. Truely Malchus, you shoot far from the marke, that you
suppose, we can defend our dignity with pride and arrogancy,
or with strength of Arms, our parents were not by such means advanced. Malch. Our ancient Laws and Orders more bec•me us that
are ancient, and let each one live according to the manner of
his time. Gam. But rather good things good men still become. Malch. If wee had any of our fathers spirit. Gam. Our fathers manners should our lives direct. Malch. This wicked fellow by a speedy death not threatnings
had beene punished. Gam. •or our order, cruelty is unmeet. Malch. Whats done for God, holy and pious is. Gam. To put to death without desert, is impious piety. Malch. Deserves not he to dye, that all subverts?Gam. If he transgresse, why do you not confute him in publicke
view with arguments and reasons? Why do you not shew there
your light of wit? you being expert, learned, and so old, set upon
one thats rude, unlearned, so young to the right way perhaps you
may reduce him, and glory to your selfe, mongst all men gain. Malch. That wound is never to be gently cur•d, but with
•ord, sword, and fire, or if you know any thing more to •ormenting. Gam. Be he such as you expresse him, or worse if you will, yet
one thing to your selfe you ought to give: that first you freely
and in gentle wise admonish him, least any one do think, that you
would rather cast him headlong down, doubtfull of heaven then
extend your hand to save him falling; It concernes you much,

that all your Enemies may understand, your will is good to save
all, none destroy, but such a one as with a mind perverse precipitates
himselfe: one thing at least I crave ere you by wrath be
further drawn, consider by this obstinate condition what you
may gaine. Malch. Why this, confound a foe, comfort the good, and
terrifie the shamelesse, confirm the wavering mind, and with this
blood our Countries Laws establish. Gam. Rather this you shall obtaine, to be accounted one, that
with all power of tyranny hath romed, untill you did a holy man
confound, one whom by reason you could not convince. Malch. Then let him bee as holy as he will and grave, Gods
spirit doth not him direct, who does neglect the Fathers ancient
Rules, and seeing no redresse with you I find, I'le seeke the Kings
assistance against Ruine. Chorus. Gamaliel in my judgement councells well, obey him
therefore; but I speak in vain, since wrath, the enemy of Gods advise,
darkens his minds cleer sight, who stops his ears to wholsome
admonitions. Gam. Hee's gone in wrath and swelling with disdain; for my
part, what was lawfull, to my power I earnestly advised him with
mild words, endeavouring to asswage his raging spirits: I gave
him faithfull counsell, but so far is he ingrate from giving any
thanks, that he even hates me for my good desert. such is the
common course, & a great fault in our degree is this, that we deceive
with shew of sanctitie, the common sort, that safely we Gods precepts
may despise; but if against our customes ought they dare, we
practise to subvert them with our gold, or witnesses suborned, and
cut them off by secret poyson, filling Herods ears with feigned utterance,
what our mind offends, revenging with false rumors,
while his breast with rage affected we the more incense, and arm
the violence of cruell wrath with calumnies. But Malchus now
is gone, unmindfull of all modesty, to Court, where he will feigne
the rising of new sects, deserting of the Fathers holy Rites, and
that the Kings Prerogative and power lyes open to derision▪ to
conclude, what ere he holds commodions to himself, masking his
wickednesse with honest names, if these he finds the King but little

move, another dart more cruell hee'l invent, hee'l cry the sworne
Bands that attend the King do secretly conspire, some wicked plot
preparing, they digest: Troops meet by night, their private
wealth by •actions to augment, these he will feign or worse into
his •ars, these poysons of his wit he will instill. And this in Princes
is a common fault, gently to hearken unto secret Tell-tales,
whereby what is most cruell, though but feigned, they easily beleeve,
and feign vain fears unto themselves, pursuing the light
ayre of moveable Report, where he that gives faithfull advertisement
is holden dull, torped and •merous: We change the name
of quondam vertue now, now not adorued with any vertue, but
with glorious titles proudly preferrd the Vulgar we beguile. As for this Prophet, with my soule I wish our Order with more
modesty and wisdom, and would bear themselves, if hither he be
sent by •ods appointment, there's no power of man that can withstand
him, but if he devise mischief by fraud concealed, with his
sword hee'l soon confound himself, •et every man interprete as his
own condition guides him: If any here my sentence do allow, his
hands he may keep cleer of guiltlesse bloud: Nor let us be profuse
of holy blood, least those examples that in cruell sort wee
make for others, afterwards return on our own heads▪ dwells not
in Herods heart immanitie enough, unlesse his rage by firebrands
added to his wrath, increase?Cho:O what a night of darkenesse doth possesse the minds of
mortalls! what Cymerian 
           •ave do we inhabite, while this brittle
life doth swiftly fleet away?False mod•sty doth skreen the brazen face, pieties vale the impious
doth conceale, Litigious men peace in their looks do feigne,
and the decei•full, veritie in words: The Vissage where sad gravity
did dwell, the only symbole of a modest life, now turnes to
cruelty with boyling wra•h, and healdong estautes with furious
•its. Even as the vapours of hot Et•a's Furnace with a swift rolling
turnes the stones about or into embers, flames Vesveus burn: so the
blind fury of revenge excites this Malchus on a guiltlesse man to
fall, and falsly to accuse poor naked truth. 
Oh thou desire of glory, swo•n with pride, mother of •o great mischiefe,
glittering praise of goodnesse coloured with a shew divine; when the minds
Kingdom thou hast once possest, with flattering poison thou inchauntst our
thoughts, and (reason bani•ht) thou disturbst the Court, the Court within
us; Piety and truth, with shamefa•tnesse and faith, are fled from thee: Faith
of the better Age a common Guest, hath lastly left the vice-dishonored earth. If there were any Artist that could set (the foreheads clouds removed. )
our cares to sight (the brest being made transparent) and disclose our minds
dark inner parts you might perceive monsters there varied into wondrous
forms, and those all stabled in a little Cell, being more than in remote and
forreign parts Nilus and Ganges beare, or all the births that Affrick•
           yeelds,
with furious portents, and those that hored Caucasus affords in his darke
Dens; the cruell Tygers rage would not be wanting there, nor the fierce
wildnesse of the deep shining yellow Lyonesse, nor the dire gluttony of ranging
Wolves, whose appetites no slaughter can asswage, nor the fell Basalisk
with poisoning breath, or stinging Aspe that brings long lasting ••eepe, or
scorpion dreaded for his hooky tayle, or Crocodile whose voice with feigned
tears so sound through the seaweeds, nor the Foxes wiles, or the Hyenaes
•alse play. Counter feit piety doth often cloak mercilesse Tyrants, and the guarded
stol•impiou• natures; in a homely weed under the Cottage shadow of a
swain vertue obscured, lyes nor sells her selfe for haughty titles, laughing as
in scorn at the mad tumults of our Justice-Courts, and the applause of common
peoples breath, nor Client like sits waiting at the doore of a great Patron,
but doth passe away the silent Ages of her blessed life in rurall privacy,
being unto none saving her selfe, or but few others known. "
"5","The second Part. Queen, Herod. Queen. MY Lord, you live secure, and feele not how your Kingly
power debayes, nor yet discern like one thats blinde, what
snares are daily set to ruine you; for if that vulgar Preacher breath but anoyeare
bonds, prison, crosse, in vain you then may threaten, proudly now his
forces he surveyes, your persons Guard his followers obscure. Her. What danger fear you from th'unarmed root. Qu. If private Conventicl•s you permit, how can you sleep secure?Her. But he instructs those that run to him of their own accord. Qu. A wide spread Faction we should feare the more. Her. His sanctit• confutes that crimination. Qu. This vaile doth cover detestable Acts. Her. Of purpled Rulers we may stand in dread. Qu. And fear the fraud of gravest hypocrites. Her. He that is helplesse, armlesse, that alayes his thirst with water

takes his food in woods, his lodging on the grasse; oh what deceit can he intend
a serpent!Qu. His attire, his meat and drinke you see, but in his brest you see not
what he bears. Her. A Kings estate is miserable, if he stand in awe of those that are in
misery. Qu. If a King through fond security become a prey, he is most miserable. Her. How then may a King remain in safety?Qu. What withstands his pleasant queit, let him soon extirp. Her. surely a Tyrant and a King thats good, differ in this; the one his
foes preserves, the other is a foe to them he Rules. Qu. Either is hard, to perish or destroy; but it is better, if make choice
he must, an enemy to destroy. Her. Where no necessity the one requires, either is miserable. Qu. should you in such a tumult use no rigour, the wavering vulgars
fury being raised the Princes, Laws, Religion, Power contemned, is to the
base Plebeans made a scorn; Take heed, that lenities deceitfull looks draw
not your minde from equity, what seems a farre off mildnesse, to one neere
at hand will be the greatest wildnesse; while you spare one Factious man
thats desperately bad, you seeke to ruine all: whom he to arm against your
life endeavours day and night, what needs must be at length feign to bee
done; that the inconstant people are stired up to arms, that every where they
all things burn, with woefull War, and Villages left wasted, our Virgins ravished
and our Cities fire, and with ambigous fortune Armies joyned. When
Liberty shall burst the reynes of Laws, that clemency too late you'l then condemne. 
And here behold that plague and mischiefs head, This is that high
Reformer, question him, and if I do not erre, you shall hear from him much
more than fame hath publis•t: nor do I mervaile that there can be some that
scorn your Government, when you your selfe the wicked sort through lenity
provoke. Her. When a good King is able to do much, his power he ought to moderate. Qu. say you so? This upstart now will moderate your scepter, and you
must rule according to his will, but if you had the spirit of a King—Her. But get thee gone, and leave these things to me. Qu. And so I will, lest you raile at me as you did before: when Queens
yeeld much to men of basest kinde, what hope of equity will cherish others. Herod. Iohn. Chorus. Ha. is she gone? shee is, now let me tell thee; there's nothing that may
move thee, or that strange thou mayest conceive, if an offended woman, rich,
noble, potent, finally a Queen, do entertain more anger then is meet. Even
thou thy self mayest witnesse it the best how much thy welfare I have still regarded;
for all the people hate thee, and require thee as guilty to be punshed,

our Priests murmur, our Nobles grieve, and surely what it is that may increase
the common sorts complaint, I will relate in brief: In thy Orations,
thou all the Orders openly revilest, the vulgar sort in our old Laws unskilled,
thou cunningly receivest the deadly venime of a new sect dispersing,
and impairest with speeches turbulent, our regall state, with the Republick
peace, prohibiting our men of War their Captain to obey, the people
Cesar, while thou promisest new Kingdoms to the vulgar, and to free
them of their newforraign yok, andstir'st them up with a vain confidence, nor
doest permit this our Rebellious Nation to rest: And madmen like us, as if
we had endured but small calamity, thou reinsittest the Romanes a new War
against us to make; Nor doubt I what thou darest do being absent, seing
thou openly dost me upbraid with an unlawfull marriage, and would heape
the peoples hate upon me, and attempt'st all that thou canst to make my brother
raise unnaturall War against mee: And as if thou hadst done little mischief:
for the safety of all alike presuming to do all things, nowagainst Heaven
thou preparest to fi•ht; those holy Rites attempting to abolish, wherewith
this Kingdom hitherto hath stood: These things the people grudge at,
and complaine that I am flow to vindicate and right their Countries Lawes,
yet have I shewn my self in nothing harsh to thee, but all the favour that a benevolent
and friendly Judge can shew thee, thou shallt plenteously receive;
For no Assyrian or Aegyptian Father hath me begotten a blood-thirsty Tyrant,
who had with you own Country, parent, nurse, I mean the spatious
Earth, so that as oft as any of the meanest People perish, I lose me thinkes a
member of my selfe even from this body torn; Nor thou shalt find of Herod
an upright and gentle Judge: If thou be able falsly to con•ute what other
things are layd unto thy charge, All thou hast uttered against me and mine I
freely pardon, heartily remit, and thou shalt understand that I neglect mine
own and prosecute the publicke wrong, the people being witnesse: and I wish
thou mayest so cleer thy self of other crimes, that no occasion of severity be
left me through thy innocency. Cho:Go forwards to be gracious in this, And thou shalt live renowned
to thy successors, not in Gold-ore or Military bands: And thinke thy Kingdom
safe, as those atchieved by equity, which charity and faith do evermore
defend. Iohn. He unto whom the Almighty doth committ a Kingdoms Rule ought
many things to hear, but all things that he heareth to believe, it is not necessary,
envy, feare, griefe, lucre, favour, oft suppresse the truth. If any of the
people or the fathers thinke I have uttered any thing against him in rigorous
manner, or ungently rayled, Tis necessary, ere he mee accuse, that he examine
his own course of life; This hath been ever my care and custome publick offences
to reproove in publicke, nothing in private have I done or taught,
Blind lurking holes I seek not, neither tax men but their v•ces, when the souldiers
asked me how I could serve at once the King and God: To ravish •ruse

violence, abuse or •ircu•vent the simple with deceit, I utt•rly forbad
•hem: To compose their sensuall desires, I gave them charge, according to
the measure of their meanes: nor any hope of new things do I preach, but only
that which you believe with me, out of the ancient Prophets; i•h meane
time, none of so many thousand is produced, that through my doctrine hath
contemned his Prince. Those matters whether by uncertain fame to you related,
or by hood winkt wrath still raging head-long with desire to hurt, falsly
invented, naked verity will by it self and easily confute. How piously I prize
the holy Rites and ancient institutions, theres no sign more certain then the
impeacher of my crimes, because he comes not forth to publick view, where
feigned things be easily beleeved, he secretly may murmure. For my denying
that your Brothers wife is yours by right consider with your self whether you
ought to serve your carnall will, rather then your Creator, and I wish all men
devoted to the love of Kings would be in mind alike, to mention things that
are both profitable, true, and good, rather then whas are pleasant and will
soon turne to their damage; Then against how many mischiefs and molestations
would the Gate or entrance be shut up, If heretofore freely and truely
I have spoken ought, do you that in your wayes are just and good, (as Equities
defenders are obliged) receive it in good part, and set these bounds to
your high potency which are prescribed you by the Laws measure: For what
Law you hold here against others, God the King supream against you and others
of your place retains: Then whatsoever you shall judge of me, beleeve
that God will judge the same of you. Her:When thou shalt come to Heaven speak heavenly things, but whi•e
thou livest on earth, earths Laws abide. Iohn. To earthly Kingdoms reverence I bear, and Kings obey, but those
eternall Kingdoms I hold my Country and their King adore. Her:The matter even it selfe i•structs thee how Kings to obey, that doest
desire a King such Laws as thou ordeinest to obey. Iohn. If I may Laws ordeine, I would proclaime to Kings, their people
should obedience yield, and Kings to God. Her:Thou hast enough contended bear him hence, the case is doubtfull,
nought can I determine, untill all things more ceartainly appear. Chor. Who doth conceive that by a Tyrants words the close or hidden
meaning of his mind, he can perceive let him well underdand, he trusts into a
foule deceitfull glasse, God prosper and turne all things to the best, what
my soule fears, it trembles to divine. Her. How wretched and how overwhelmed with care a Kings condition
is, no tongue of man, or politique Oration can expresse, nor any thoughts attain;
the vulgar hold us only free and happy, that are vexed with terror, and
with poverty besieged, with miserable servitude oppre•t: the people, whatsoever
they desire, or love or dread, they freely dare confesse, and modest
riches without fear en•oy: But when we walke abroad we must assume an

honest persons habit, and are forced to promise courteously with gracious
lookes, our anger to defer and hide our hate, till a fit season, chiefly then to
threat, when greatest cause of fear our mindes torments: A modest Prince
the people do desp•e, one rigerous they hate, the wavering vulgar we are
compelled to serve, and can command nothing to our desire. This new-come
Prophet if I cut off, I shall offend the people, if I preserve him, for my Royall
state I little do provide, what shall I do then? I must regard my Kingdom,
none so neer as I am to my selfe, if I must serve the people for a scepter,
what's more foolish then, while thou seekest to please the vulgar sort to
cast away a Kingdom? Joy and wrath the people rashly take, and rashly
leave: tis now my resolution to conffrm the Royall power that I hold, with
blood: the vulgar will be easily appeased. If by my sufferance this evill creep
a little further, twill be past redresse, why he forsooth durst tell me to my
teeth my marriage was unchast, and if he scape for this unpunished, his audacious
will there will not rest, but scepters to his Laws then he will force to
stoop, then he will cast his Captives into chaynes, then he will seeke to rule,
and not be ruled, give Laws to Kings, and turne all upside down, we must
apply unto a g•owing evill speedy cure, flames rising must be quenched ere
they increase. By suffering old injuries, we raise fresh contumelies, new reproachfull
termes, If with the peoples favour I may gaine some satisfaction
by this pun•shment, to wyn their favour I will not neglect: But if perverse
against me they persist, What Malchus of our Laws may freely bable, what
curious questions he may vainly cast with intricate debate, that, I conceive,
concernes not me, and let the people know, this one Law to be kept, that
they may think, All things to me are lawfull without Law. Chor. Oh thou Creator of this spatious Orbe, whose nod makes all things
tremble, Heaven adorned with glittering stars, Earth variously deckt with
flourishing Array, and seas that swell with raging violent motions, ebbes and
flouds: Hath not lowd flame that knew the former age, brought to our hearing
thy then famous acts? When thou by vigor of thy puissant arme, proud
Kingdoms boasting of their, gold and wealth hast utterly abolished and exextirped
us in their land to plant, their land to prepard, neither by counsell, strength, nor
Arms of ours. But Heavens Almighty favour safely brought us through the fierce Armies,
art not thou the King of 〈…〉? a•t not thou the God of the Iews Nation, by whose
guiding hand (our enemies destroyd) their treacherous Tents we trampled under foot, con
           •iding
not in our own strength and com•ge; but in thee our most auspicious Leader, bringing
spoyles and triumph to our Countrey• wilt thou now being once our Father, utterly
for sake the people whom thou lovest? Are we now left a f•ble for our foes? Religion
lyes with Piety despised; in purpled Courts, fraud is predomanant; the holy flocke yeild
as a sacrifice their pious necks to the •ell Axe, our Prophets by the sword perish; our Tyrant
enemies rejoi•e in our laments, and they they the Kingdom rule un•er pretext of piety
and zeale, though punishment descr•ing whilest they smart, whose worth deserves a Kingdome. 
Ri•e, O Lord, and helpe thy people, To our Adversaries shew thy sel•e such as
Thee our Fathers saw in the Red-sea, confounding Pharao•s Hoast; such as the Prophets
boy did thee behold, when to disperse the flames throughout the Camp. Thou to thy fiery
Horses gavest the re•gns. The must of error that obscures the light of humane understanding

overwhelmed with a darke cloud: O Lord: now drive away, let both the Land warmd
with the rising sun, and that which. doth it in down-going view, confesse that onely thou
c•nst all things do. "
"6","The third Part. MALCHUs. THus truly is the state of humane things, That if God grant that we should have our
wish, we are to seeke, uncertain what to chuse, what to refuse; we covet honor, we•lth,
Dominion, Heritage for us and ours, which having our desire, we often lose bondage,
imprisonment, and shamefull flight unto our foes we wish, which oft beget their greatest
glory, to our bitter shame: And surely I have learnd, that this is true (not go to fetch examples
a farre off) by mine own dang•r; for when this Baptizer, living remote from•s
on Mountaine tops, bewitched and d•ew with him the rediculous rout; I onely (the rest
idle) did defend the Pharisees, Authority and worth: nor did I cease alwayes and means
to try, untill this Adversaries guilty hands were strongly bound, and in the common Goal,
his insolence allayed, and the whole Court his crimes had knowledge of by my redort; and
and yet his c••mes imprisonment, and bonds, nought in my thog•hts avail, the peoples hearts
the horrid power of this hellish plague hath so possest, and every one hath quast the deadly
poyson, that they all bewaile his dangerous condition, yeilding honor unto his •minent
noworthy death. But wherescere he can, let MALCHUs go, their curse• h: cannot
scape, at me they point, on me they looke with a Malignant eye, doing all favours to that
wicked wretch, who hath berest us of all differences in our a••airs and orders, keeping watch
before the Prison. surely nothing now in misery exceeds us, that devote our selves (all other
businesse set apart) unto the peoples profit; he that slaves himselfe to them, may easily
perceive, that such his favour he hath ill bestowed, as upon those that being ill inclined
th•ough ••nate malice, ever use to bear toward the •ad, good will, and to-contemne the chiefest
persons of a Common-weale. Oh whither shall I go? how first complain, where
shall my anger principally light? whom shall I first assist? the ungodly crew love that false
Prophet, and the Rab••es murmure, the King connives, the Nobles him neglect! I only
with these shoulders do support, even with these, our Countries falling Rites, none lending
me a hand; why then do I, and none but I, the common change bewayle? shall I put
o•f my office, and forsake our Orders, dignity, with all our lawes and sacred Rites, and suffer
my poor selfe to be a laughing-stock to those that hate me? Ile do it, ile suffer it, I indeed
I will; for what else •m I do? shall I alone bear that my self, which all refuse to
bear? and lay my self fo•th to the publike ruine? God keep his own, •ith now the world is
such, that every man must loc• unto himself: Ile do the like, and if the commonwealth
I rule amisse, then let the ruine light upon my head; those that now while I stand, favour
me most, will first when I am falne, assault me with their heels; if well I rule, and do ill
place my favour, I shall get nothing but envy: now too lat• I like GAMALI•s advise,
unlesse perhaps, no man from error can return too late; I had rather they should seeke me
constant here, than when all is done, my indiscretion punish: what seemeth good to each
man, let him think Ile rid my selfe of troubles, and repaire my favour with this Prophet;
nor will he being a simple hearted man reject me; But If I finde him towards me pe•ver•e,
Ile set all engines, lest the people think he perisht by my craft; if they to me be reconciled,
the businesse will not fall on every side, and here I think he comes, he comes indeed, see
what a company follows the wicked wretch, and we the while sit in the Cities heart amongst
our Chairs, alone and 〈◊〉 but I first w•ll hear what this grand Mr. utters. IOHN. O thou that 〈◊〉 things dost make voyd, judge and rule what ere the ayre in its loose
b•some bears, what ere the 〈◊〉 can precreate, •r sea within its waters nourish; thee there
God all do acknowledge, 〈◊〉; thee alone finde the•r creation; in a constant way thy
laws once given, freely they ob•y; At thy command the spring with flowers paints the sert•le
fields, and fruits the summer yeilds, Autumne, pure wine abundantly aff••ds, and winter
with white frost the 〈◊〉 attires, the crooked Ri•ers rolle into the sea huge heaps of waters,

the sea ebs and flows, the silver Moon illuminates the night, the golden
sun the day, and views this orb with never r•sting brightnesse; To conclude,
ther's nothing whatsoere in heaven or earth that does not willingly its king
obey, its maker love. and towards him declare with all the service possibly it
can its good affection, but only man; Man who is bound far more than all the
rest Gods precepts to delight in and obey, only contemnes them, and rejects
the reigns of laws divine; yea, into every sin precipitates himselfe, accounts
all just in his own strength, aud measures right by lust. Malch. Thy fair beginnings as yet well proceed. IohnNor do I so much wonder at the Gentiles, that through the world do
wander from the way, as at this people that themselves do boast to be Gods
heritage, yet raile at others, and cry them down as impious, when no Nation
on this globe seated whersoere the sun surveys the earth, lives more licentious. Mal. surely as yet he hath sayd no untruth. IohnNor is this only the light vulgars fault: The Levite in white v•sture
sh•ning far, and the Law writer of his knowledge proud, and you so reverend
for age mature by oblique error, are drawn out o'the way, widdowes
and orphans causes where you Judge, fall to the ground, the rich oppresse the
poore, both right and wrong are set at equall price. Mal. To hear this and be mute, I burst with rage. IohnBut you, the Rabines, that in holy gifts and knowledge fain all othes
to excell: And you the sacred dignity of Priests, and the chief Prelates of the
sacred Order, tyth all the hearbs born of our mother earth, Dill, Mint, Rue,
Garlick, Nettles, or green Hey, does not escape you. But if you should read
or teach the Prophets oracles, and shew the track or steps of your own holy
life, then your authority is stricken mute, then like dumb dogs that barke
not: here you fret and fume about your sheep-coats, but the Wolves which
of you drive away? the Wolves sayd I? you are the Wolves your selves that
flee your flocke, clothed with their Woo••, their milke dot slack your thirst,
their flesh your hunger: thus your selves you feed, but not your flock. Mal. Hence Concord with a mischiefe, can I brooke my Order any longer
to be checkt so insolently, with so base reproach? if God from Heaven
should send me with this charge, that these things I should hear such his command,
I rather would decline, than hear so much: I can endure no longer,
Ho sir, you master of mis-rule, is this doctrine yours? do you instruct the silly
people thus?IohnIf you be good, those things that I declare, nothing concern you. Mal. To traduce a Priest, does it belong to thee?IohnWhen I reprove a wicked man, I hold it spoken well. Mal. A young man ought his elders to obey. Iohn'Tis rather meet that all should God obey. Mal. Then dost thou speak these things by Gods command?Iohn. Truth doth command all men to speake the truth. Malch. It often profits to conceale the truth,Iohn. Profit with bad works joyned I nought account. Malch. Thou mayest call goodnesse what seemes bad to thee. Iohn. To see (when I am able to reduce them into the way) so many thousands
perish, it seems too bad. Malch. Thou able to reduce them, why are not we the feeders of the flock. Iohn. If it be all one both to feed and fley. Malch. Do thine own businesse and let ours alone,Iohn. My neighbours misery is likewise mine. Malch. I pray, who are you with such power endued? Are you that Christ
unto our Fathers promised?Iohn. I am not. Malch. Are you then a Prophet?Iohn. Neither. Malch. Are you Elias?
         Iohn. No. Malch. If none of these, nor Christ our hope, no Prophet nor Elias,
how darst thou be the author of new Baptisme? declare to me, whom shall
we say thou art?Iohn. I am a voice that one the Mountain tops afar off call and cry, Prepare
the way, make strieght your paths, the Lord is neer at hand, at whose first coming
shall the valleys rend, and Mountaines will be levyed with the plain, I in his name
the people do baptize, whose shoes I am not worthy to pull off, whom none doth know
thoug• he converse with you. Malch. What snares doth he invent, deluding me with circumstances, by
what miracle provest thou the authority which thus thou claimest?Iohn. And by what miracle thine canst thou prove? I may on the other
side thee also aske. Malch. How obstinate he is, bee't nere so much that thou concealest, yet
all of us do know, what makes thee mad: Thou surely doest desire to grow
up through our envy, thou wouldest gain glory and mighty riches by our
losse, and become potent by flagitious Acts nor doest deceive us but deceivst
thy selfe: neither wert thou the first that did attempt thus to beguile, yet
thee the last I wish, that may be duely punished, or that thou by my advise
thy mind wouldst rather change, that as thou hast made many go astray
through thee, they may into the way return, I have seen others that have
made a shew of sever holinesse by outward habit, whereby more easily they
might be thought of simple modest mind, but by such art, honor, and wealth
when once they had obtained, their dispositions by degrees appeared and
were discovered, for that pious course, well clokd before they openly contemned
and to their true conditions gave the Reigns. But if this way thou
aimest at honors hight, unskilfull men blinde ignorance deceives: By that
Crosse path, to glory none attain, unlesse experience that best instructs, and
age that such experience doth beget hath very much beguild mee, for thy fame
and livlyhood thou better mayst provide seeking rather safty than renown. Ioh. If I deliver truth and do what's right, wherefore should any bid
mee hold my peace, but if untruth, doe you that are so learned declare it
to the simple. Malch. Of these things, when thou shalt suffer punishment by
death, thou wilt repent thee. Ioh. Threaten that to Those, who feare to die. Mal. But if I live, ere long, I'le make thee muorn for this perversness,
and know what it is, the Elders to neglect the scribes, revile and vex
the Rabines with thy saucy Tongue, and haply feele, since thou hast
no regard to purchase friends, the power of old mens hate. Cho. He that himselfe prepares for secret stealth avoyds the light
and Murderers doe hate a burning Torch, that's conscious of their
crimes: A childe refuseth medicines intermixt with bitter wormwood▪
a cut wound abhorres the wholsome plaisters; and to him whose breast
the hidden evills of his soule torments, the truth is grievous, which doth
open lay his troubled heart and his bad minde bewray. But O you
Hypocrites in shew severe, whom lawlesse gaine with rugged brow delights
through error of the credulous common sort, how well so ever you
your thoughts conceale: And though the •oule sinke of your impious
minds be closely hid, your gnawing conscience argues your lurking
secrets, That tormenter inclosed within your Entrailes eats you up,
scourging with cruell stripes; O three times blest, and more is he, that
being pure within, becomes not guiltie to Domestick Iudges, nor by a
torturer within his heart, pent up unseene, endures perpetuall smart. "
"7","The fourth part. Malchus, Chorus, Herodias. THere is no certain trusting to the King, his and the Common cause,
he hath betraied through foule ambition, while hee bends his
thoughts to please the people, and with favour hunts for ayrie applause;
Me, under shew of lenity, hee labours to subject unto the Co••ons
wrath, and with my perill would vindicate his wrongs, even prepared
to satisfie the people with my head, as if he saw, they heavily did beare
the Baptists death: But if to have the chiefe of their new Faction
flaine, they took it lightly; he subtily by the vulgar would be thought
with greatest glorie to have tane revenge. Thus to themselves Kings
of their Cities blood exhibite shewes by turnes, and make a sport of mutuall
slaughter, challenge to themselves, and publish, all by them was

only done, all whatsoever the vulgar Votes approve, and attribute our
labours industry to their owne prayse; but if the uncertain ayre of popular
•avour otherwise doe turn against their expectation and desire,
then on their Officers they cast the fault, and with a vile breath, their
own crime avert from innocent blood. One only now remaines a Partner
of our griefe, the Queen enraged, much like a Tyger of her Whelps
•erest, for that the Baptist had before the King accused the alliance of
her former Bed to be polluted, openly condemning the league of marriage
with a Brothers wife forbidden by the Law: now while the fire of
estuating wrath is fresh and hot; I will adde fire-brands to her troubled
thoughts, and feed them with fit language: But behold, how oppor
         •unely
she presents her selfe. Chor. Now poison comes to poison, flame to flame, now comes the
uttermost hazard. Malch. Noble Queen, our Nations glorious honour, who alone in
this so great a Kingdom doe deserve the highest place, God save you. Qu. And thee Malchus, the most religious Rabine: but why sad?Malch. For that which I suppose, your minde afflict. Qu. It may be so, but tell me, what is that?Malch. Doe you, to see your dignity despised, your royall names
authoritie so sacred throughout the world to be accounted vile, your
Crown made subject to the vulgars sco•ne, beare it with patience?Qu. What then shall I doe? teach me a remedy. Malch. Within your heart conceive so high a wrath, as may be worthy
of your Princely stock, your nuptiall bed and bosome. Qu. That's done already, I am burst with ire, weep and exclaime and
sharply reprehend, but no reliefe by wrath or teares I gaine, for all
my words are scattered by the winde. Mal. If with your husband a meet power you had, would he have born
your wrongs thus unrevenged? Or rather (may I speak more truly) his. Qu. Thou feest the people, how they be inclinde. Perhaps by this imprisonment
the King, The Baptists eager spirits think to •uaile, and to
allay his boldnesse?Malch. If you suppose imp•isonment and bonds, Can bridle the fierce
spirit of this thiefe, Your Highnesse erres; The rage of savage beasts,
That break their Dens and libertie regain, Is much more vehement them
theirs that range, In woods or desert Mountaines: Being freed, What
will not he attempt, Whose •etters now the people reveren•e, wrath once
•rovokd is kindled not a•laid, by taunts and scorn •he haughty spirit is
〈◊〉 f•ry bor•. Qu. This benefit should rather quench it quite, For that by royall
mildnesse he is free, Who by his own perversnesse might have perished. Mal. What your esteem a benefit, he holds an injury, and will more
oft remember, that you imprisoned him, then set him free. Qu. A rough and crabbed na•ure, thou relat'st. Malch. This in most men is naturally graffed, What favour you afford
is quickly lost, but what disfavor, no man doth forget, Good turnes
if born in memory with bad, All men well neere doe hate, Think that
the Baptist, as oft as he remembers your Desert, will not his crime forget,
and still believe, he is not loo•e from that, But in your thoughts, a
guilty man by soule ambi•ion freed, His paine remitted and you wrath
supprest but for a time. Qu. Yet courtesie prevailes to mitigate fierce natures. Malch. What with long use is hardned to the worst, We much more
easily may break then bend. Qu. What, doe you then advise me in this case?Malch. I'le shew you quickly, may I be believed. Qu. And what your counsell I will not delay. Malch. By seeking, agitating, and providing, (not fitting still) great
things are brought to passe. Qu. If seeking, agitating and providing nought may availe, 'tis better
to sit still, then to make work in vaine, and be to others a mocking stock. Malch. Where strength oft cannot, labour overcomes: a tall Oake
is not suddenly born down, nor does the warring Ram at one assault
overthrow the wals, what, often you suppose cannot be finished, is in time
dispatched• And importunity doth overcome, what reason sometimes
cannot; therefore seeke, solicite Herod, mingle teares with suite, wrath
with monitions, flattring words with brawles, work and intreat him
by what meanes you can, embracing all occasions every where; But if
by such plaine course you cannot speed, set snares and use deceit, for
mine own part, I am resolved untill, we finde successe in our desig•ments,
never to desi•t. Cho. Envie at length, and bitter grie•e incensed by impious F•ries,
on this pious Prophet have cas• the venome of their cruelty; from thence
fierce calum•ny and false de•raction joyned with fell cruelty, by cursed
fraud maintaine the battell, from hence harmlesse truth s•pported by no
guard, their threats contemnes. so many weapons doe one head assault;
so many su•tle drifts doe menace death to this young man, yet
like the hardy Holme, with North-east wi•ds assaulted, or a Rock, that's

           •eaten by the seas returning flood, •e with no fear is moved: O power
divine by all men to be hono•ed! candid Truth, whom neither force of
armes with trembling feare, nor fraud with all her projects can depell
from her firme station or unmoved estate. The grievous changes of unstable
fortune th•u only fearest not, and dost arme thy breast, obnoxious to
no chances, with a strength insuperable, and th•• impartiall hand of the
three Ladies, both of life and death for bidst us to begrieved at. But this
Prophet I am too slow to meet with, and relate the ruthful'st newes that
ever pierced his eares; yet see he stands before the prison doore. O thou
more holy then thy holy Parents, and th'only •cred it of old innocence!
Now for thy safetie in due time provide: The Rabine Malchus privately
intends deceit against thee, and King Herods wife, unwitting what
to doe is almost mad; The Courtiers flatter her, the King diffembles
what he conceives, and others twixt the teeth mutter, as those that dare
not speak the truth. Now is your finall perill. Ioh. And what's that?Cho. To escape death, you shall have much to doe. Ioh. Of eminent evills, I hold that the sum. Cho. Then which, none greater can a man befall. Ioh. As Tyrants power and deceit may cease, Times length may
bear it of its own accord, Which evill men do f•ar, good men do wish. Cho. But your own safety though you doe neglect, consider ours, and
that high spirit of yours a while remitting, sue for Herods mercy, and
make some friends, I hope he will not prove inexorable. Ioh. Doe not I doe this?Cho. That minde, God grant you. Ioh. To sue there's no need, for that minde •ath been long now with
my blood the Tyrant hasts to satisfie his wrath: Neither doe I rcsist, how
am I able rather to pacifie this bloody King, Then when the same things,
we will not and will. Cho. Good words I pray. Ioh. Why then report you thus, and thus advise me? ••y there are
two Kings, and they on both sides two things bid me doe that be repugnant,
The one King is earthly cruell and mischievous, who threatens
death, and hath a power my body to destroy; The other heavenly, mercifull
and milde, forbids me death to fear, and a reward proposeth to my
tourage, being able in flames inevitable to torment body and soule:
Now seeing these two Kings doe differ in command, give mee advice. 
wh•ther I ••all obey. Cho. If now •ccasion offerd you omir. Herod will never after be appeas's,
but God is ever easie to be pleased. Ioh. Gods anger, the more gently it doth rage, the more severely punishment
req•ires, being once moved. Cho. so, death which God would have all mortals feare, doe you
disdaine; the body with the soule, he in a mutuall bond of love hath knit,
lest unadvisedly some cause be offred, that may their holy fellowship
disjoyne. Ioh. Death I disdain nor, but by momentany. shun that erernall, and
the use of light which God hath given me, at his command I willingly
surrender. Cho. Will you then, being a Parent thus forsake your Orphans. Ioh. He who believes that God his Father is, shall never •eean Orphan. Cho. Can the teares of all your friends and kindred, whom you
leave unto a spightfull Tyrant move you nothing?Ioh. I leave them not, but they mee rather leave; for truly unto death
I run the way from the beginning of the world ordained, yea all men that
enioy the gift of life are born to die, and and wee are all restrained with one
con•ition, we tend all to death, and thither every day doth surely lead
us; God will have death a pennance to the bad, and to the good a Port,
the utmost bounds of a long iourney, and the Gate that leads to the
beginning of a longer life, that sends us rather born againe then dead. 
unto a glorious house of endlesse light; This is to man from prison a
relcase and a free passage to life wanting death; this way the whole flock
of the Fathers went, and all must follow them: what man is he, that having
once begun a race to run, desires not instantly the goale to gaine?
who, by night wandring in the stormy sea, refuseth shelter in a quiet
Port: What exile straying or'c the Desert Hills of a strange Countrey,
will bee discontent into his own to make a quick returne? I therefore
having overpast my way, suppose my selfe come to the very goale. Now
almost quitted from the sea of life, I view the Haven; from a forraign
soyle, home I return to see my heavenly father, that father who with
waters bounds the earth; invested earth with Heaven, he that rules the
certain courses of the moving sphear, who only all things made, guides
and preserves; to whom all things both quick and dead doe live even as
the flame it's Globes doth upwards roll, waters perpetually downw•rd•
fall, and all things do proceed to their own foment; my 〈◊〉 from heavendeso•nded,
labours now, a habitation in eternall light 〈◊〉 gaine with
〈1 page duplicate〉
           
           〈1 page duplicate〉
           
           
him that all things did create, whom not to see, is death, life to behold. 
If Caucasus rough-growne with hoary frost, the Ayre with Tempests
and the sea with stormes, and the whole Region with excessive heate
should all resist me, thither I would goe; to see so many Leaders, Prophers,
Kings, and pious Iudges, shall I not make way, though, with a
thousand deaths I be opposed? My spirit therefore from this body freed,
(this carnall prison) thither longs to flye, Even whither all the world betimes
or late shall be dispatched; For long life I conceive, is nothing, but
a gentle servitude in a hard painfull prison; O sweet death, that art of
heavy Toyles the sole Release, the Haven where all grief and trouble
cease, yet unto few men profitable known: Receive this shipwrackt body
in thy bosome, and bring it where eternall peace abides, whither no
impious violence, deceit, or ealumny shall follow it. Chor. O thou, thrice happy in this constancy of mind, O wretches
that we are, whom foolish feare debarres the sweet society and sight of
true felicity; Then since thou hold it what's needfull to be done, to thee
we wish eternall health and Farwell. How are the minds of men in
wayes unlike turned by discordant strite? of no offence he that is guilty,
doth not feare to dye, he that deserves to dye, if with vaine threats death
lightly greet him, with degenerate feare growes pale and trembles; As
the wicked wight shunnes death with heavy heart, so he that's good, of
death des••ous, thorough flames and flouds, o're deveous Rocks, all
dangers and E•••remes, freely precipitates his noble soule; For sundry
benefits to death belong to evill men unknowne, a happy life is Fates
Associate; neither doe the Good totally dye, but still their better part
contemnes the greedy fire and Mounts aloft to its own Country, Heaven;
Amongst the saints a certain Habitation doth attend soules that are
harmlesse, but the guilty G••ost, by snake haird Furies in a brimstone
lake, with greedy C•rberus his hungry I• wes, and Tan•alus with plenty
never filled, is evermore affrighted, gnawne and whipt; from hence
comes feare to evill men; from thence good hope to good men, even
while their mindes, appeating prodigall of brittle breath, hasten to prosecute
unfading life; O •yren! potent in bewitching baits, Life, that
abhorring goodnesse, dost affect what's fraudulent, and with thy flattering
might precludst the neighbout passage of our sinnes, and shutst
the Haven of perperuall peace; Where neither Martiall clamor doth affright,
nor Trumpets, with hoarse clangor doe 〈◊〉 nor pilling pi
           ••tes
terifie by •e•, nor cruell theives beset the silent grove, nor my one
made 〈…〉
           
           Felix, that alone with pleasant case he may himselfe besot the poore and
weakeore-whelmes with bloudy flaughter, neither he, that for vaine
Titles may exchange the lives of the rude Commons, but where simple
vertue with faire prosperity and tranquill rest possesseth all, and day can
never learne to end in darknesse, nor life ever know of any fi•erall, nor
Ioy of griefe. O thou sweet freindship of this carnall house, and thou too
lovely prison of our life; Now, now at length free from bewitching
Bonds the heaven-borne soule of man, which too unmindefull of her
owne Country joyfull in the yoke of her d•generate foule nuptiall bed,
and with somniferous I ethe• poysoning sloth inebriated, in thy lapthou
huggst. O thou deceitfull covering of day, into thy ashes vanishing returne,
That to her country Heaven the soule reslord, may fill it selfe with
becames of purest light. so from all sorrow shee shall be enlargd. And of all troubles thou by death dischargd. "
"8","The Fifth part. The Queene. The Rabine Malchus hath my hopes beguilde, and Herod hath himself
with mee his Queene, (fearing the rumors of the babling crew)
through his owne yanity alike betrayd. Next, for my daughter, what
shee may effect, I greatly feare, the King did promise herat his great
banquet, that he would reward her danceing feates (which gave him
high content) with whatsoever shee of him should aske. Now unto
mee the girle hath past her word, that shee would aske of him none other
boone, but in a dish to have the Baptists head; And she will have it,
certainly shee will, If Horods mind be not to me unknown, The peoples
hatred I conceive on mee hee will divert, himselfe remaining free: And
I will beare it when the deed is done, and with willing heart: with joy of
my revenge weighing their hate, and with my gaine my staine, For women
to be cruell 'tis a shame, a shame indeed: unlesse more shame it were▪
that of such nature there are many Kings: But H•rod and my daughter
doe appeare, the ncor•r my hope is, my feare the 〈…〉
doth burne. Herod, Daughter, Queene. Her. And hast thou 〈◊〉 sufficiently 〈…〉
         Daught. 〈…〉 enough and royal. Her•. Never fear, things that are 〈◊〉 establish• with my faith and
before witnesses, aske halfe my kingdome, it shall be thine, no power
can avert him that is willing. Daugh. We shall shortly see what thing it i•. Hero. 'Tis certain, ask it now. Daugh. Your Kingdome sir I need not, which I deeme even as mine
own while you possesse the Crown, as if I held the scepter, but I aske a
thing b•th meet and easie. Hero. Thou thy selfe (not I) art in the fault thou hast it not. Daugh. Give me the Bapists head then in this Charger. Hero. What words are these by thee so rashly vented?Daugh. Not rashly neither. Hero. Thou demand'st a gift that ill become a Virgin. Daugh. To destroy an enemy is no uncomly deed. Hero. Is therefore he an enemy and worthy of a Kings wrath. Daugh. He's worthy of such wrath, who by his crimes deserves it. Hero. What redresse may I then purchase for the peoples hate?Daugh. The people must obey, and Kings command. Hero. 'Tis a Kings duty iust things to command. Daugh. Kings by commanding, may make those things iust which
were before uniust. Hero. But Kings commands, the Law doth moderate. Daugh. If that be right, which pleaseth Princes, then they rule the
Lawes, •ot the Lawes them. Hero. Then, for a King, a Tyrant the people will divulge me. Daugh. But your scepter keeps them in awe. Hero. It doth, and yet they'l babble. Daugh. such babbling sir, by punishment severe is brid•ed. Hero. Kingdomes are ill kept with feare,Daugh. And Kingdomes by impunity of crimes are easily subverted. Hero. Yet we finde, Kings are securest in the Cities faith. Daugh. It is not needfull that a King be loved, but feared. Hero. The cruell are or• whelmed with hate. Daugh. A gentle King the Vulgar do• despise. Qu. My Lord, all you have pleaded only tends, in my opinion, that
your promise past, in vaine may passe away, as yet me thinks, you do not
know the duties of a King; if th•se things which the common sort
•uppose hone•t and otherwise; you, for a King bel•eve to be the same,

King Herod erres. Brothers and sisters, fathers, sonnes in law, friends,
kindred, Citizens, and adverse parties, are bonds for poor men, but vaine
words for Kings; Let him that on his head once puts a Crowne, put
from him all degrees of Common duty; let him judge all things honest
that conduce to a Kings benefit, and hold no fact to be unseemly, that he
shall effect for his ow•e safety; on the King depends the peoples welfare;
Whosoever then to wards his Prince is pious, hath regard unto the pecples
welfare: shall the blood of this base fellow be so highly prizd, that
for anxietie by day nor night you can repose? release us of this feare, of
shame, your scepter, and of waste, your City, of rapine, Armes, and all
of civill warre? 'Tis fit by an example new and great, you should ordein
that Kingdomes to all men be sacred and inviolably stand; he has committed
an ungracious act, and by that let him perish; if no crime he has
committed let him seeke for me•: Give to your Queene her enemy, your
Queene if you neglect, yet as a King and father your promise to your
daughter see performd. Her. That Promise to performe with my best faith I am determind,
but if my advice, the •i•le doe aske more wisely shee will wish. Qu. But if shee aske my counsell, yours my Lord she may not change
or take. Her. Is't even so? should I so unadvised have made a vow? thus to a
foolish girle my faith obligd? and thus committed to a womans ha•ds
my Kingdome, safety, treasure, life, and death?Qu. Kings promises let certaine truth confirme. Her. Well. fith I may not, what I may deny againe I doe admonish
and intreat; let not wrath urge you to a bloudy act, unworthy of your
dignity and sex. Qu. Grant this, and leave all other things to us. Her. If of the Prophet you determi•e ought more rigourous, the perill,
blame, and shame is only yours. Qu. Now shall we vindicate our royall dignity in future times to be
of none derided, now I'l force the flubborne people to speake well of
Kings or learne it to their grief, and make them hold that all their Kings
commands they gladly must beare and obey though never so unjust. Chorus. Cho. O thou great City where King David reigned, you Towers of

wealthy salomon and salem, from whence against thy Prophets doth
arise a rage so terrible, and cruell thrist of blood so innocent? unhappy
thou, whom it becomes to be a pattern, rule, or helme of pi•ty, art now
become the only mirror of a wicked life: slaughter with violence, fraud,
theft and rapine, are thy chiefe exercise, no Godly zeale perswades the
Churchman to restraine his hands from horrible deceits, the people
now forsake the Lord, that all things did create, and worship Idols for
God, stone and wood, with Calves and Lambes their Altars are still
hot, and Images the workman doth adore, which hee himself hath
wrought, life he requires of a meere stock, and eloquence he craves of a
dumb stone, the rich intereats the poore, the Lo••• the servant, ancient
Rites are lost; The guiltlesse Prophets blood brings thee perforce to the
Tribunall of the greatest Iudge, The poore exclaime and widowes fill
the ayre with their complaints, for which the fearfull paine of just revenge
attends the•, unlesses • be in my divination much de•eived, for he•
that throwes down insolence and pride, (being the 〈◊〉 of Neaven,
Earth and seas) views from above th'oppressed peoples teares, their
heav•e prayers never doth forget, and speedily with a 〈◊〉 arme,
will punish thy unspeak•ble misdeeds: And over 〈◊〉 thy Towers,
where with thou swelst in silent victor-like, The barbarou foe, shall
all thy Buildings, Farmes and Lands possesse; The V•neyard Keeper
shall repaire his fruit to am Out 〈◊〉 Master; And where now salomons
Temple high towards Heaven do th•ise, • foraign ru•tick shall
his harvest make: O therefore, while Gods favour to rep••• affords
thee respit of thy ill pa•t life the sinnes 〈…〉 a move those
fruitlesse Images of foreigne Rites: Cu•b thy proph••e desire of
wretched wealth, and greedy thirsting for thy Brot••rs blood; But
thou wilt not repent thy ill past lif•, 〈…〉 Rites amove,
nor shun the greedy thirst of brothers blood, not one profane
desire of wretched wealth: A vicious P•ague shall therefore fe•se on
thee: Famine and warre, with barrennesse 〈◊〉 want, shall over whelm
thee, no• to be withstood; till thou be quitted with dese••ed blood. Nuncius, Cho••s. Nun. Where may I finde (O who will tell me where?) The Prophets
followers, that I may relate my heavy tydings. Ch•. stay your pace a while, 〈…〉 in

briefe, for what you beare I gladly would pertake. Nun. O but to know, what you to know desire, 'twill not delight
you. Cho. Yet your short abode think not too long, how ere the master
stands. Nun. Know you what boone the Daughter of our King hath beged of
him. Cho. To have the Prophets head given her in a Charger. Nun. And his head, even so shee hath obtaind. Cho. O horrible and most inhumane act; that heavenly vigour and
comly countenance by rigorous death is utterly decayed, and cruell
force with ever during silence hath shut up those lips that did abound
with sacred vertue. Nun. why weepe you? cease to poure out vaine complaints. Cho. When things to be bewaild I see and heare, why should I not
bewaile them?Nun. If death be to be bewaild, let us bewaile the dead, whose hopes
doe with their bodyes lye interrd; who doe not thinke, their short sleep
being done, their bones must rise again, and there remaines another
life, Let wretched men bewaile those that are dead, and only wretched
lived; None can be made by fortune miserable, though the like and
of mortall life betide the innocent and guilty, good and bad, no man shall
die ill, that hath lived well: If by the severall manners of their ends you
judge men miserable, you will thinke so many holy fathers to be such,
who dyed by fire, or water, sword or crosse, for him that dyed Defender
of the truth, both for Religion and his Countrey Lawes, in all
good things pursuing wee should pray, and wish to have like end or funerall day. Cho. Verily you have uttered nought amisse, but we whom errors
and opinion draw, foolish by flying death with death doe meet, the water
drowning whom the fire hath spard; And by the power of contagious
ayre, others are killd that have escaped the sea, And some, that in the
battell have survived, with sicknesse pyning die; God doth ordeine wee
may deferre, but not our deaths eschew;And daily wee delay our houres of death, yet withDiseases, danger, troubles, griefe:Long life is nothing, but a brittle chaine
Of diuturnall evill, which is knitWith a contiuall course, and speedy race,Even to the bounds of death: Not doe wee hold,(Bound with this bond) our selves to bee inthraledIn misery, but feare the fatall knife,With deeper horror then a servile life. FINIs. "
