"","x"
"1","Mac Flecknoe. ALL humane things are subject to decay,And, when Fate summons, Monarchs must obeyThis Flecnoe found, who, like Augustus, youngWas called to Empire, and had governed long:In Prose and Verse, was owned, without disputeThrough all the Realms of Non-sense, absolute. This aged Prince now flourishing in Peace,And blest with issue of a large increase. Worn out with business, did at length debateTo settle the succession of the state:And pond'ring which of all his sons was fitTo Reign, and wage immortal War with Wit:Cried, 'tis resolved; for Nature pleads that Heshould onely rule, who most resembles me:sh—alone my perfect image bears,Nature in dulness from his tender years. sh—alone of all my sons, is heWho stands confirmed in full stupidity. The rest to some faint meaning make pretence,But sh—never deviates into sense. some Beams of Wit on other souls may fall,strike through and make a lucid intervall;But sh—'s genuine night admits no ray,His rising Fogs prevail upon the Day:
Besides his goodly Fabrick fills the eye,And seems designed for thoughtless Majesty:Thoughtless as Monarch Oakes, that shade the plain,And, spread in solemn state, supinely reign. Heywood and sberley were but Types of thee,Thou last great Prophet of Tautology:Even I, a dunce of more renown than they,Was sent before but to prepare thy way:And coursly clad in Norwich Drugget cameTo teach the Nations in thy greater name. My warbling Lute, the Lute I whilom strungWhen to King John of Portugal I sung,Was but the prelude to that glorious day,When thou on silver Thames did'st cut thy way,With well timed Oars before the Royal Barge,swelled with the Pride of thy Celestial charge;And big with Hymn, Commander of an Host,The like was ne'er in Epsom Blankets tost. Methinks I see the new Arion sail,The Lute still trembling underneath thy nail. At thy well sharpned thumb from shore to shoreThe Treble squeaks for fear, the Bases roar:Echoes from Pissing-Ally, sh—call,And sh—they resound from A—Hall. 
        About thy boat the little Fishes throng,As at the Morning Toast, that Floats along. sometimes as Prince of thy Harmonious bandThou weild'st thy Papers in thy threshing hand. 
st. Andre's feet ne'er kept more equal time,Not ev'n the feet of thy own Psyche's rhime:Though they in number as in sense excell;so just, so like tautology they sell,That, pale with envy, singleton forsworeThe Lute and sword which he in Triumph bore,And vowed he ne'er would act Villerius more. Here stopt the good old syre; and wept for joyIn silent raptures of the hopefull boy. All Arguments, but most his Plays, perswade,That for anointed dulness he was made. Close to the Walls which fair Augusta bind,(The fair Augusta much to fears inclined)An ancient fabrick, raised t' inform the fight,There stood of yore, and Barbican it hight:A watch Tower once; but now, so Fate ordains,Of all the Pile an empty name remains. From its old Ruins Brothel-houses rise,scenes of lewd loves, and of polluted joys. Where their vast Courts the Mother-strumpets keep,And, undisturbed by Watch, in silence sleep. Near these a Nursery erects its head,Where Queens are formed, and future Hero's bred;Where unfledged Actors learn to laugh and cry,Where infant Punks their tender Voices try,And little Maximins the Gods defy. Great Fletcher never treads in Buskins here,Nor greater Johnson dares in socks appear. 
But gentle simkin just reception findsAmidst this Monument of vanisht minds:Pure Clinches, the suburbian Muse affords;And Panton waging harmless War with words. Here Flecknoe, as a place to Fame well known,Ambitiously designed his sh—'s Throne. For ancient Decker prophesied long since,That in this Pile should Reign a mighty Prince,Born for a scourge of Wit, and flayle of sense:To whom true dulness should some Psyches owe,But Worlds of Misers from his pen should flow;Humorists and Hypocrites it should produce,Whole Raymond Families, and Tribes of Bruce. 
        Now Empress Fame had publisht the renown,Of sh—'s Coronation through the Town. Rowsed by report of Fame, the Nations meet,From near Bun-Hill, and distant Watling-street. 
        No Persian Carpets spread th' Imperial way,But scattered Limbs of mangled Poets lay:From dusty shops neglected Authors come,Martyrs of Pies, and Reliques of the Bum. Much Heywood, shirly, Ogleby there lay,But loads of sh—almost choakt the way. Bilk't stationers for Yeomen stood prepared,And H—was Captain of the Guard. The hoary Prince in Majesty appeared,High on a Throne of his own Labours reared. 
At his right hand our young Ascanius sateRome's other hope, and Pillar of the state. His Brows thick fogs, instead of glories, grace,And lambent dulness plaid around his face. As Hannibal did to the Altars come,swore by his syre a mortal Foe to Rome;
        so sh—swore, nor should his Vow be vain,That he till Death true dulness would maintain;And in his father's Right, and Realms defence,Ne'er to have peace with Wit, nor truce with sense. The King himself the sacred Unction made,As King by Office, and as Priest by Trade:In his sinister hand, instead of Ball,He placed a mighty Mug of potent Ale;Love's Kingdom to his right he did convey,At once his sceptre and his rule of sway;Whose righteous Lore the Prince had practised young,And from whose Loyns recorded Psyche sprung. His Temples last with Poppies were o'erspread,That nodding seemed to consecrate his head:Just at that point of time, if Fame not lye,On his left hand twelve reverend Owls did fly. so Romulus, 'tis sung, by Tyber's Brook,Presage of sway from twice six Vultures took. Th' admiring throng loud acclamations make,And Omens of his future Empire take. The syre then shook the honours of his head,And from his brows damps of oblivion shed
Full on the filial dulness: long he stood,Repelling from his Breast the raging God;At length burst out in this prophetick mood:Heavens bless my son, from Ireland let him reignTo far Barbadoes on the Western main;Of his Dominion may no end be known,And greater than his Father's be his Throne. Beyond loves Kingdom let him stretch his Pen;He paused, and all the people cried Amen. 
        Then thus, continued he, my son advancestill in new Impudence, new Ignorance. success let others teach, learn thou from mePangs without birth, and fruitless Industry. Let Virtuoso's in five years be writ;Yet not one thought accuse thy toyl of Wit. Let gentle George in triumph tread the stage,Make Dorimant betray, and Loveit rage;Let Cully, Cockwood, Fopling, charm the Pit,And in their folly shew the Writers wit. Yet still thy fools shall stand in thy defence,And justifie their Author's want of sense. Let 'em be all by thy own model madeOf dulness, and desire no foreign aid:That they to future ages may be known,Not Copies drawn, but issue of thy own. Nay let thy men of wit too be the same,All full of thee, and differing but in name;
But let no alien s—dl—y interposeTo lard with wit thy hungry Epsom prose. And when false flowers of Rhethorick thou would'st: cull,Trust Nature, do not labour to be dull;But write thy best, and top; and in each line,sir Formal's oratory will be thine. sir Formal, though unsought, attends thy quill,And does thy Northern Dedications fill. Nor let false friends seduce thy mind to fame,By arrogating Johnson's Hostile name. Let Father Flecnoe fire thy mind with praise,And Uncle Ogleby thy envy raise. Thou art my blood, where Johnson has no part;What share have we in Nature or in Art?Where did his wit on learning fix a brand,And rail at Arts he did not understand?Where made he love in Prince Nicander's vein,Or swept the dust in Psyche's humble strain?Where sold he Bargains, Whip-stich, kiss my Arse,Promised a Play and dwinled to a Farce?When did his Muse from Fletcher scenes purloin,As thou whole Eth'ridg dost transfuse to thine?But so transfused as Oyl on Waters flow,His always floats above, thine sinks below. This is thy Province, this thy wondrous way,New Humours to invent for each new Play:This is that boasted Byas of thy mind,By which one way, to dulness, 'tis inclined. 
Which makes thy writings lean on one side still,And in all changes that way bends thy will. Nor let thy mountain belly make pretenceOf likeness; thine's a tympany of sense. A Tun of Man in thy large Bulk is writ,But sure thou'rt but a Kilderkin of wit. Like mine thy gentle numbers feebly creep,Thy Tragick Muse gives smiles, thy Comick sleep. With whate'er gall thou sett'st thy self to write,Thy inoffensive satyrs never bite. In thy fellonious heart, though Venom lies,It does but touch thy Irish pen, and dyes. Thy Genius calls thee not to purchase fameIn keen Iambicks, but mild Anagram:Leave writing Plays, and chuse for thy commandsome peacefull Province in Acrostick Land. There thou may'st wings display and Altars raise,And torture one poor word Ten thousand ways. Or if thou would'st thy diff'rent talents suit,set thy own songs, and sing them to thy lute. He said, but his last words were scarcely heard,For Bruce and Longvil had a Trap prepared,And down they sent thee yet declaiming Bard. sinking he left his Drugget robe behind,Born upwards by a subterranean wind. The Mantle fell to the young Prophet's part,With double portion of his Father's Art. "
