"","x"
"1","A
LETTER
FROM A
Parliament man
TO HIs
FRIEND,
Concerning the Proceedings of the
House of COMMONs this
last sessions, begun the 13th of
October, 1675. Printed in the Year, 1675. "
"2","A
LETTER from a
Parliament man
To his FRIEND,
Concerning the Proceedings of the
House of COMMONs this
last session, &c. sIR,I see you are greatly scandalized at our slow and confused
Proceedings. I confess you have cause enough, but
were you but within these Walls for one half day, and
saw the strange Make and Complexion that this House
is of, you would wonder as much that ever you wondred
at it: For we are such a pied Parliament, that none can say
of what Colour we are; for we consist of old Cavaliers, old
Round-haeads, Indigent Courtiers, and true Country Gentlemen;
the two latter are most numerous, and would in probability
bring things to some Issue, were they not clogged
with the humerous uncertainties of the former. For the
old Cavalier grown Aged, and almost past his Vice, is damnable
Godly, and makes his doating Piety more a Plague to

the World, than his youthful Debauchery was: For he is
so much a By got to the Bishops, that he forces his Loyalty to
strike sail to his Religion, and could be content to pare the
Nails a little of the Civil Government, so you would but let
him sharpen the Ecclesiastical Tallons; which behaviour of
his so exasperates the Round-head, that he on the other hand
cares not what Increases the Interest of the Crown receives,
so he can but diminish that of the Miter: so that the Round-head
had rather enslave the Man, than the Conscience; The
Cavalier rather the Conscience than the Man, there being a
sufficient stock of Animosity as proper Matter to work
upon. Upon these therefore the Courtier mutually plays: For if
any Anticourt motion be made, he gains the Round-head
either to oppose or absent, by telling them, If they will joyn
him now, he will joyn with them for Liberty of Conscience. 
And when any Affair is started on the behalf of the Countrey,
he assures the Cavaliers, If they will then stand by him, he
will then joyn with them in promoting a Bill against the Fanatiques. 
Thus play they on both hands, that no Motion of
a publick nature is made, but they win upon the one or other
of them; and by this Art gain a Majority against the Country
Gentlemen, which otherwise they would never have:
Wherefore it were happy that we had neither Round-head,
nor Cavalier in the House; for they are each of them so Prejudicate
against the other, that their sitting here signifies nothing
but their Fostering their old Venome, and lying at
Catch to snap every advantage to bear down each other,
though it be in the destruction of their Countrey. 
      For if the Round-heads bring in a good Bill, the old Cavalier
opposes it; for no other reason, but because they
brought it in. so that as the poor English silk-weavers, are
feign to hire a French-man to sell their Ribbons: so are the
Round-heads a Cavalier, to move for those Bills they desire
should pass; which so sowers the Round-head, that he revenges
that Carriage upon any Bill the Cavalier offers; and
the Rage and Passion of the one and other, are so powerful,
that it blinds them both, that neither perceives the Advantage

they give the Courtier, to abuse both them and their
Countrey too: so that if either of them do any Good, it is
only out of pure Envy against the other. Thus you see how
we are yoaked, and seeing this, you may cease your admiration
that we offer at all, and do just nothing. 
      Nor is this Division alone of the House all we have to
lament (for Death, that common Cure, does now every day
lessen this evil) but that which is more our misery, is, that
those Gentlemen who are truly for the Good of their Country,
will not be perswaded to stand upon the sure Basis of Rational
Principles (like Workmen too presumptive of their Judgments
that will not Build by rule) but rather affect the most
loose standing on the sandy foundation of Heat and Humour:
By reason of which they often do as much harm as
good, and yet perceive it not; this is the sore evil we are
under. For I would not doubt the Countries carrying it from
the Court in every Vote, let the Courtiers use all the Art they
could, would the Country Gentlemen but give themselves the
trouble to enform their understandings a little, and not suffer
themselves to be hurried by a heedless Inadvertency into vulgar
Notions. Which, if well examined, are directly contrary to
their honest intentions; For lack of which they totally mistake
their Interest, fall foul on their Friends, support their Enemies,
and carry on the designs of the Court, whilst they aim at the
service of their Countrey. For if they would take the pains
but to think what is the greatest Enemy in the World, that
English Law and Liberty always had, still hath, and ever must
have; It may be the result of such a thought would say, it was
Encroaching Prerogative. Well, if then they would but beg
from themselves but so much seriousness, as to think this second
thought, to check this Prerogative, which is so dangerous
an Enemy to our Laws and Liberties, peradventure that
thought would answer, In suppressing all they could its Creatures
and Dependants, and supporting such, whose Interest it is
to keep Prerogative within its just bounds. Now could they be
prevailed with but to think a third thought, it would Land
them at the full and satisfactory solution of the Question,
and will hold in every thing. But I will put it in a Case
        
wherein we are most apt to Err, and wherein we reckon it
no less than Piety to play the Fool, to the end you may see
how miserably we are cheated and abused, by sucking in the
untried Notions that Education, the Arts of others, or our own
Ignorance have imposed upon us. The third thought therefore shall be this: Which are most
the Creatures and supporters of boundless Prerogative, Prelates,
or dissenting Protestants? The answer to which must, and can
be no otherwise, The Prelates. Well then, if we would now
reduce this to Practice, and say, The greatest Friends to Prerogative
are the Prelates, the greatest Enemies to our Laws and
Liberties is Prerogative. The only way therefore to restrain
Prerogative, is to do, What? To fortifie and strengthen the
Yoke of the Prelates over the Neck of the People? No:
(surely this were an odd and a barbarous kind of Reasoning)
But to give Liberty to dissenting Protestants, as the best means to
keep up the Ballance against boundless Prerogative. For these
must and never can be otherwise (unless by Accident, and by
Mistake) than Friends to Liberty: But the Prelates neither
are nor can be otherwise than Creatures to Prerogative, for all
their Promotions, Dignities, and Domination depends upon it. The same might be said concerning the only Antient and
true strength of the Nation, the Legal Militia, and a standing
Army. The Militia must, and can never be otherwise
than for English Liberty, 'cause else it doth destroy it self; but
a standing Force can be for nothing but Prerogative, by whom
it hath its idle Living and subsistance. I could instance also
in many other Particulars, but our Inadvertency in this, is
demonstration enough how much we are cheated by the common
and hackney Notions imposed upon us; and this is almost
the cause of all the Error we commit. For missing our true
Footing, you see we have run in the mistaken Notion of
being for the Church so long, till we have almost destroyed
the state, and advanced Prerogative so much by suppressing
Nonconformity, that it's well nigh beyond our reach or power
to put Check to it; and had not Time, and but an indifferent
Observation, shewed us how much we were abused in this

matter: And that a Lay-Conformist and a Fanatique can live as
quietly and neighbourly together (would the Prelates but suffer
them) as any in the World, we had ruined our selves
past all recovery. For by our Bouying up the Bishops in their
harsh and irreconcileable spirit, in stead of Healing, we
have so fed and nourished the Discontents throughout the
Kingdom, that I think nothing keeps the Fire from flaming
out afresh in another intestine War but the bare circumstance
of Opportunity only; and how long that will be able to restrain
Passions that are made Wild by Oppression, is worthy a
very serious Consideration; and therefore there is hardly
any thing more a Wonder to wise Men, than to see the
Clergie run at this rate upon the Dissenters: wherefore since
the Nonconformists have given so large and ample a Testimony
of their willingness to live Peaceably, if yet notwithstanding
the Clergie will not suffer them to be quiet in their
Families and their Houses, I doubt, they may at one time
or other, drive them into the Field, and then it may exceed
their Divine Art to Conjure them down again; for he
sees but little, that sees not the English Temper is better to
be Led than Driven. And therefore I think it would not
be more a Vanity, to compel the Ladies to wear Queen Elizabeths
Ruff, than to force the Nonconformists to be drest in
her Religion. 
      Nor yet are these all the Arts we are under: For we have
a Gang that Huff, and bear themselves high on the Countrey
side, but earn only for the Court; these lay out their Craft
in putting the House upon little trifling things, and spend
and waste the Mettle thereof, upon such pittiful Pickadilloes,
as 'tis next to a shame for an English Parliament so much as
to mention. These start a fierce Dispute about some little
Matter, and keep a bluster as if none were such faithful Patriots
as they, when they do it on purpose only to while out
the Time, and thin the House, by tiring the honest Country
Gentry in so tedious, fruitless, and trifling attendance. Do
but move things worthy a Parliament; as that we may have
our old known Rights of Annual Parliaments ascertained: That
none that are or shall be Bribed by any Place or Office, shall

ever sit in this House: That Parliament ought not to be Prorogued,
Adjourned, or Dissolved, till all Petitions are heard,
and the Aggrievances of the People redressed; with many
things more of as great Importance; O then, forsooth, their
pretended Loyalty (which in plain English is easily understood)
will not abide such unmannerly and clownish Debates
as these, and twenty such little shreds of Non-sense are impertinently
urged in stead of Argument. But further, These Country-Court Engines, after they have
taken the Measures of the House, at the opening of every
session, by our thanks for the gracious speech, which being
the true Pulse of the House; if it happen to come so hard as
speaks us but saint and cool to the one thing necessary, (the
matter of Money) then they know what will follow, that the
Court will get no Grist that sessions; and though the Court
in indignation could turn them Home on the Morrow, yet
it must consult its Reputation a little, restrain its Resentments,
and suffer them to sit about a six weeks, or two months, and then
they assure the Court, since they can get no good by them,
they shall take no harm; and therefore to stop them from
some worthy Undertaking, they by their feigned Zeal against
Court-Corruptions, put them upon Impeaching some Treasurer,
Councellor, or Minister of state; and having spent half
our time about this, the rest is spent for the Clergie upon
Church-Work, which we have been so often put upon and
tired with these many sessions: Though Partiality unbecomes
a Parliament, who ought to lay the whole Body that
we represent a like easie, Nonconformists, as well as Conformists,
for we were chosen by both, and with that intention
that we should oppress neither. To lay one part therefore
of the Body on a Pillow, and the other on a Rack, sorts
our Wisdom little, but our Justice-worse. You now see all
our shapes, save only the Indigents, concerning whom I
need say but little, for their Votes are publickly saleable for
a Guiny, and a Dinner every day in the Week, unless the
House be upon Money or a Minister of state: For that is their
Harvest, and then they make their Earnings suit the Work
they are about, which inclines them most constantly as sure

        Clyants to the Court. For what with gaining the one and
saving the other, they now and then adventure a Vote on
the Countrey side; but the dread of Dissolution makes them
strait tack about. The only thing we are obliged to them
for, is, that they do nothing Gratis, but make every Tax
as well Chargeable to the Court, as burthensome to the Countrey,
and save no Mans Neck, but they break his Purse. 
And yet when all is said, did but the Country Gentry rightly
understand the interest of Liberty, let the Courtiers and Indigents
do what they could, they might yet at last deserve the
Name of a worthy English Parliament; Which that we may
do, is not more passionately your desire, than it also is of,sir,Your most humble
servant. 
T. EFINIs. "
