"","x"
"1","ABsALOM
AND
ACHITOPHEL. A
POEM. — si Propius stesTe Capiet Magis—The second Editon; Augmented and Revised. "
"2","TO THE
READER. 'Tis not my intention to make an apology for my Poem: some 
will think it needs no excuse: and others will receive none. The design, I am sure, is honest: but he who draws his Pen for one party, must expect to make enemies of the other. 〈◊〉 
        Wit and Fool are consequents of Whig and Tory; and every man is a Knave or an Ass to the contrary side. There's a treasury of Merits in the •hanatick Church, as well as in the Papist; and a Pennyworth to be had of saintship, Honesty, and Poetry, for the Loud, the Factious, and the Blockheads: But the longest Chapter in Deuteronomy has 〈◊〉 Curses enow for an Anti-Bromingham. My comfort is, their manifest prejudice to my Cause, will render their judgement of less Authority against me. Yet if a Poem have a Genius, it will force its own reception in the World. For there's a sweetness in good Verse, which tickles even while it hurts: And, no man can be heartily angry with him, who pleases him against his will. The commendation of Adverversaries, is the greatest triumph of a Writer; because it never comes unless extorted. But I can be satisfied on more easy terms: If I happen to please the more moderate sort, I shall be sure of an honest party; and, in all probability, of the best Judges; for, the least concerned, are commonly the least corrupt: And I confess I have laid in for those, by rebating the satyre, (where Justice would allow it) from carrying too sharp an edge. They who can criticize so weakly, as to imagine I have done my worst, may be convinced at their own cost, that I can write severely, with more ease than I can gently. I have but 〈◊〉 at 〈◊〉 mens Follies, when I coud have declaimed against their 〈◊〉; and other mens Vertues I have commended, as freely as I have 〈◊〉 their 〈◊〉. And now, if you are a malicious Reader, I expect 〈◊〉 
        〈◊〉 return upon me, that I affect to be thought more impartial than I am. But if men are not to be judged by their Professions, God 〈◊〉 
        〈◊〉 
        commonwealths-men, for professing so plausibly for the Government. 〈◊〉 cannot be so unconscionable, as to charge me for not 〈◊〉 of my name; for that would reflect too grossly upon your own party, who never dare, though they have the advantage of a Jury to secure themIf you like not my Poem, the fault may possibly be in my writing 
(though 'tis hard for an Author to judge against himself;) But, more
probably, 'tis in your Morals, which cannot bear the truth of it. The
violent, on both sides, will condemn the character of Absalom, as either
too favourably, or too hardly drawn. But they are not the violent
whom I desire to please; The fault, on the right hand, is to Extenuate,
Palliate and Indulge; and, to confess freely, I have endeavoured
to commit it. Besides the respect which I owe his Birth, I have a
greater for his Heroick Vertues; and David himself could not be
more tender of the Young man's Life, than I would be of his Reputation. 
But, since the most excellent Natures are always the most easy;
and, as being such, are the soonest perverted by ill Counsels, especially
when baited with Fame and Glory; 'tis no more a wonder that he withstood
not the temptation of Achitophel, than it was for Adam not to
have resisted the two Devils, the serpent and the Woman. The conclusion
of the story I purposely forbore to prosecute, because I could not
obtain from my self to shew Absalom unfortunate. The Frame of it
was cut out but for a Picture to the wast; and if the Draught be so
far true, 'tis as much as I designed. Were I the Inventer, who am only the Historian, I should certainly
conclude the Piece with the reconcilement of Absalom to David; And
who knows but this may come to pass? Things were not brought to an
extremity where I left the story; there seems yet to be room left for
a Composure, hereafter there may only be for Pity. I have not so much
as an uncharitable wish against Achitophel, but am content to be acc•sed
of a good natured Error; and, to hope with Origen, that the Devil
himself may at last be saved. For which reason, in this Poem, he
is neither brought to set his House in order, nor to dispose of his Person
afterwards, as he in wisdom shall think sit. God is infinitely merciful,
and his Vicegerent is only not so, because he is not Infinite. The true end of satyre, is the amendment of Vices by correction;
And he who writes honestly, is no more an enemy to the Offender, than
the Physitian to the Patient, when he prescribes harsh Remedies to
an inveterate Disease; for those are only in order to prevent the Chirurgeon's
work of an Ense Rescindendum, which I wish not to my very
enemies. To conclude all, If the Body Politick have any Analogy to
the Natural, in my weak judgment, an Act of Oblivion were as necessary
in a Hot, distempered state, as an Opiate would be in a raging
Fever. "
"3","To the unknown Author of this Admirable Poem. I Thought, forgive my sin, the boasted fireOf Poets souls did long ago expire;Of Folly or of Madness did accuseThe Wretch that thought himself possest with Muse;Laugh't at the God within, that did inspireWith more than humane thoughts, the tuneful Quire;But sure 'tis more than Fancy or the DreamOf Rhimers slumbring by the Muses stream. some livelier spark of heaven, and more refinedFrom earthly dross, fills the great Poet's mind. Witness these mighty and immortal lines,Thro each of which th' informing Genius shines. scarce a Diviner flame inspired the King,Of whom thy Muse does so sublimely sing. Not David's self could in a Nobler VerseHis gloriously offending son rehearse,Tho in his Brest the Prophet's fury met,The Father's Fondness, and the Poet's Wit. Here all consent in Wonder and in Praise,And to the unknown Poet Altars raise. Which thou must needs accept with equal joy,As when Aeoenas heard the Wars of Troy;
        Wrapt up himself in darkness and unseen,Extolled with Wonder by the Tyrian Queen. sure thou already art secure of Fame;Nor want'st new Glories to exalt thy Name:What Father else woud have refused to ownso great a son as God-like Absalon?
        "
"4","To the unknown Author of this Excellent Poem. TAke it as earnest of a Faith renewed,Your Theme is vast, your Verse divinely good;Where tho the Nine their beauteous strokes repeat,And the turned lines on golden Anvils beat,It looks as if they strook 'em at a heat. so all serenely great, so just, refined,Like Angels love to humane seed enclined,It starts a Giant, and exalts the kind. 'Tis spirit seen, whose fiery Atomes roulso brightly fierce, each syllable's a soul:Tis minature of man, but he's all heart;Tis what the World would be, but wants the art. To whom ev'n the Phanaticks Altars raise,Bow in their own despight, and grin your praise. As if a Milton from the dead arose,Filed off his rust, and the right party chose. Nor, sir, be shocked at what the gloomy say,Turn not your feet too inward nor too splay;'Tis gracious all, and great; push on your Theme,Lean your grieved head on David's Diadem;David, that Rebel Israel's envy moved,David, by God, and all good men beloved. The Beauties of your Absalom excel,But more the Charms of Charming Annabel;
        Of Annabel, than May's first morn, more bright;Chearful as summers Noon, and chast as Winters Night. Of Annabel, the Muses dearest Theme,Of Annabel, the Angel of my dream. Thus let a broken Eloquence attend,And to your Master-piece these shadows send. "
"5","ABsALOM and ACHITOPHEL. A POEMIN pious times, e'r Priest-Craft did begin,Before Poligamy was made a sin;When Man, on many, multiplied his kind,E'r one to one was, cursedly, confined;When Nature prompted, & no law deniedPromiscuous Use of Concubine and Bride;Then, Israel's Monarch, after Heavens own heart,His vigorous warmth did, variously, impartTo Wives and slaves; And, wide as his Command,scattered his Maker's Image through the Land. Michal, of Royal blood, the Crown did wear;A soil ungrateful to the Tiller's care;Not so the rest; for several Mothers boreTo Godlike David several sons before. But since like slaves his bed they did ascend,No True succession could their seed attend. Of all this Numerous Progeny was noneso beautiful so brave as Absolon:
        Whether, inspired by some diviner Lust,His Father got him with a greater Gust;Or that his Conscious destiny made way,By manly beauty to Imperial sway. Early in Foreign fields he won RenownWith Kings and states allied to Israels Crown;In Peace the thoughts of War he coud remove,And seemed as he were only born for love. What e'r he did, was done with so much ease,In him alone, 'twas Natural to pleaseHis motions all accompanied with grace;And Paradise was opened in his face. With secret Joy, indulgent David viewedHis Youthful Image in his son renewed:To all his wishes Nothing he denied;〈…〉
What faults he had (for who from faults is free?His Father coud not, or he woud not see. some warm excesses, which the Law forbore,Were construed Youth that purged by boyling o'r;And Amnon's Murther, by a specious Name,Was called a Just Revenge for injured Fame. Thus Praised, and Loved, the Noble Youth remained,While David, undistutbed in sion raigned. But Life can never be sincerely blest;heaven punishes the bad, and proves the best. The Iews, a Headstrong, Moody, Murm'ring race,As ever tried th' extent and stretch of grace;God's pampered people whom, debauched with ease,No King could govern, nor no God could please;(Gods they tried of every shape and sizeThat God-smiths could produce, or Priests devise;)These Adam-wits, too fortunately free,Began to dream they wanted libertie;And when no rule, no president was foundOf men, by Laws less circumscribed and bound;They led their wild desires to woods and Caves;And thought that all but savages were slaves. They who, when saul was dead, without a blow,Made foolish Isbosheth the Crown forgo;Who banisht David did from Hebron bring,And, with a General shout, Proclaimed him King:Those very Iews, who, at their very best,Their Humour more than Loyalty exprest,Now, wondred why, so long, they had obeiedAn Idol-Monarch which their hands had made,Thought they might ruine him they could create;Or melt him to that Golden Calf, a state. But these were random bolts, No formed Design,Nor Intrest made the Factious Croud to joyn:The sober part of Israel, free from stain,Well knew the value of a peaceful reign:And, looking backward with a wise afright,saw seames of wounds, dishonest to the sight:In contemplation of whose ugly scars,They Curst the memory of Civil Wars. 
The moderate sort of men, thus qualified,Inclined the Ballance to the better side:And, David's mildness managed it so well,The Bad found no occasion to rebel. But, when to sin our byast Nature leans,The careful Devil is still at hand with means,And providently pimps for ill desires:The good Old Cause revived, a Plot requires. Plots, true or false, are necessary things,To raise up commonwealths, and ruine Kings. Th' Inhabitants of old Ierusalem
        Were Iebusites, the Town so called from them;And their's the Native Right—But when the chosen people grew more strong,The rightful Cause at length became the wrong:And every loss the men of Iebus bore,They still were thought God's enemies the more:Thus, worn and weakened, well or ill content,submit they must to David's Government:Impoverished, and deprived of all Command,Their Taxes doubled as they lost their Land;And, what was harder yet to flesh and blood,Their Gods disgraced and burnt like common wood:This set the Heathen Priesthood in a flame;For Priests of all Religions are the same:Of whatsoe'r descent their Godhead be,stock, stone, or other homely Pedigree,In his defence his servants are as bold,As if he had been born of beaten Gold. The Iewish Rabbins thô their enemies,In this conclude them honest men and wise. For 'twas their duty, all the Learned think,T' espouse his Cause by whom they eat and drink. From hence began that Plot, the Nation's curse,Bad in it self, but represented worse. Raised in extremes, and in extremes decried;With Oaths affirmed, with dying Vows denied. Not weighed, or winnowed by the multitude;But swallowed in the mass, unchewed and crude. 
some Truth there was, but dashed and brewed with Lies;To 〈…〉 Fool•, and puzzle all the Wise,〈…〉 did equal folly call,〈…〉, or believing all,〈…〉 Rites the •ebusites imbraced;〈…〉 were recomme•ded by their tast. 〈…〉 mus• needs be good,〈…〉 once for Worship and for Food. 〈…〉 could not introduce these Gods;〈…〉, in former days was odds. so 〈◊〉 was used, (the sacri•icers trade,)Fools are more hard to conquer than perswade. Their busie 〈◊〉 mingled •ith the Iews;
        And 〈◊〉, for Convert•, even the Court and stews:Which Hebrew Priests the more unkindly took,Because the Fleece accompanies the Flock. some thought they God's Anointed meant to slayBy Guns, invented since full many a day. Our Author swears it not; b•t who can knowHow •ar the Devil and Iebusites may go?This Plot, which failed •or want of common sense,Had yet a deep and dang•ro•s consequence:For, as when raging Fevers boyl the blood,The standing Lake soon floats into a flood;And ev'ry hostile humour, which beforeslept quiet in its Chann••s, 〈◊〉 o'r;so, several Factions 〈…〉 Ferment,Work up to 〈…〉. some •y their ••iends, 〈…〉 thought wise,O•posed the power to 〈…〉 not rise. some had in Courts 〈…〉 from thence,Like Fiends, were 〈…〉
        some, by their 〈…〉 
         •rown,•rom pardoned 〈…〉 Throne;Were raised in 〈…〉
        strong Bands, if 〈…〉 tye. Of these the 〈…〉
        A Name to 〈…〉
        For close 〈…〉
        sagacious, 〈◊〉, and 〈…〉
        
Restless, unfixt in Principle and Place;In power unpleased, impatient of Disgrace. A fiery soul, which working out its way,Fretted the Pig•y-Body to decay;And o'r informed the Tenement of Clay. A daring Pilot in extremity;Pleased with the Danger, when the Waves went highHe sought the storms; but for a Calm un•it,Would steer to nigh the sands, to boast his Wit,Great Wits are sure to Madness neer allied;And thin Partitions do their Bounds divide:Else, why should he, with Wealth and Honour blest,Refuse his Age the needful hours of rest?Punish a Body which he coud not please;Bankrupt of Life, yet Prodigal of ease?And all to leave, what with his Toyl he won,To that unfeathered, two legged thing, a son:Got, while his soul did hudled Notions try;And born a shapeless Lump, like Anarchy. In friendship false, implacable in hate:Resolved to ruine, or to Rule the state. To compass this, the Triple Bond he broke;The Pillars of the publick safety shook:And fitted Israel for a Foreign Yoke. Then, seized with Fear, yet still affecting Fame,Usurped a Patriot's All-atoning Name. so easy still it proves in factious times,With publick Zeal to cancel private crimes:How safe is Treason, and how sacred ill,Where none can sin against the peoples will:Where Crowds can wink; and no o••ence be known,since in anothers guilt they find their own. Yet, Fame deserved, no Enemy can grudge;The statesman we abhor, but praise the Judge. In Israels Courts ne'r sat an Abbethdin
        With more discerning eyes, or hands more clean:Unbribed, unsought, the Wretched to redress;swi•t of Dispatch, and easie of Access. Oh, had he been content to serve the Crown,With vertues only proper to the Gown;
Or, had the rankness of the soyl been freedFrom Cockle, that opprest the Noble seed:David, for him his tuneful Harp had strung,And heaven had wanted one Immortal song. But wild Ambition loves to slide, not stand;And Fortunes Ice prefers to Vertues Land:Achitophel, grown weary to possessA lawful Fame, and lazy Happiness;Disdained the Golden Fruit to gather free,And lent the Croud his Arm to shake the Tree. Now, manifest of Crimes, contrived long since,He stood at bold Defiance with his Prince:Held up the Buckler of the peoples Cause,Ag•inst the Crown; and sculked behind the Laws. The wished occasion of the Plot he takes;some circumstances finds, but more he makes. By buzzing Emissaries, fills the earsOf listning Crowds, with jealousies and fearsOf Arbitrary Counsels brought to light,And proves the King himself a Iebusite:
        Weak Arguments! which yet he knew full well,Were strong with People easie to Rebel. For, governed by the Moon, the giddy Iews
        Tread the same track when she the Prime renews▪
        And once in twenty years, their scribes Record,By natural Instinct they change their Lord. Achitophel still wants a Chief, and noneWas found so fit as Warlike Absalon:
        Not, that he wished his Greatness to create,(For Pol•titians neither love nor hate:)But, for he knew, his Title not allowed,Would keep him still depending on the Crowd,That Kingly power, thus ebbing out, might beDrawn to the dregs of a Democracy. Him he attempts, with studied Arts to please. And sheds his Venome, in such words as theseAuspicious Prince! at whose Nativitysome Royal Planet ruled the southern sky;Thy longing Countreys Darling and Desire;Their clowdy Pillar, and their •uardian Fire:
Their second Moses, whose extended WandDivides the seas, and shews the promised Land:Whose dawning Day, in every distant age,Has exercised the sacred Prophets rage:The peoples Pray'r, the glad Diviners Theam,The young mens Vision, and the old mens Dream!Thee, saviour, Thee, the Nations Vows confess;And, never satisfied with seeing, bless:swift, unbespoken Pomps, thy steps proclaim,And stammering Babes are taught to lisp thy Name. How long wilt thou the general Joy detain;starve, and defraud the people of thy Reign?Content ingloriously to pass thy daysLike one of Vertues Fools that feeds on praise;Till thy fresh Glories, which now shine so bright,Grow stale and tarnish with our daily sight. Believe me, Royal Youth, thy Fruit must be,Or gathered ripe, or rot upon the Tree. Heaven, has to all allotted, soon or late,some lucky Revolution of their Fate:Whose motions, if we watch and guide with skill,(For humane good depends on humane Will,)Our Fortune rolls, as from a smoth descent,And, from the first Impression, takes the bent:But, if unseized, she glides away like wind;And leaves repenting Folly far behind. Now, now she meets you, with a glorious prize,And spreads her Locks before her as she flies. Had thus old David, from whose Loins you spring,Not dared, when Fortune called him, to be King,At Gath an Exile he might still remain,And Heavens Anointing Oil had been in vain. Let his successful Youth your hopes engage;But shun th' example of Declining Age:Behold him setting in his Western skies,The shadows lengthning as the Vapours rise. He is not now, as when on Jordan's sandThe joyful People thronged to see him Land,Cov'ring the Beach, and •lackning all the strand
        
But, like the Prince of Angels from his height,Comes tumbling downward with diminished light;Betraied by one poor Plot to publick scorn,(Our only blessing since his curst Return. )Those heaps of people which one sheaf did bind,Blown off, and scattered by a puss of wind:What strength can he to your designs oppose,Naked of Friends, and round beset with Foes?If Pharaoh's doubtful succour he should use,A Foreign Aid woud more incense the Iews:
        Proud Egypt woud dissembled Friendship bring▪
        Foment the War, but not support the King:Nor woud the Royal Party e'r •niteWith Pharoah's Arms, t'assist the Iebusite;
        Or if they shoud, their Interest soon would break,And, with such •dious Aid, make David weak. All sorts of men, by my successful Arts,A••orring Kings, estrange their altered Hearts〈…〉 And 'tis the general Cry,〈◊〉, commonwealth, and Liberty:〈…〉 Champion of the publick Good,A•d to their Arms a Chief of Royal Blood;〈…〉 hope, and what applause〈…〉 gain by such a cause?Not 〈…〉 alone, that gaudy Flow'r,〈…〉 but solid power:〈…〉 limited command,〈…〉 Love of all your native Land,〈…〉 Tit'e, long, and dark,Drawn 〈◊〉 the mouldy Rolls of Noah's Ark. What c•nn•t •raise effect in mighty Minds,〈…〉•ooths, and when Ambition blinds!〈◊〉 of power, on earth a vitious weed,〈…〉 from High, is of Caelestial seed:〈…〉 And when men aspire,〈…〉 too much of Heavenly Fire. 〈…〉 too covetous of Fame,〈…〉 of Angels Metal in his frame;〈◊〉 was led from Vertues ways;Made dr•nk with Honour, and debauched with praise. 
Half loath, and half consenting to the ill,(For Loyal B•ood within him strugled still)He thus replied—And what pretence have ITo take up Arms for publick liberty?My Father Governs with unquestioned right;The Faiths Defender, and mankinds delight:Good, gracious, just, observant of the Laws;And heaven by wonder has espoused his cause. Whom has he wronged in all his Peaceful Reign?Who sues for Justice to his Throne in vain?What millions has he pardoned of his Foes,Whom just revenge did to his wrath expose?Mild, easy, humble, studious of our good;Enclined to mercy, and averse from blood;If mildness ill with stubborn Israel suit,His crime is God's beloved Attribute. What could he gain, his peop•e to betray,Or change his right, for arbitrary sway?Let haughty Pharaoh curse with such a Reign,His fruitful Nile, and yoke a servile Train. If David's Rule Ierusalem displease,The Dog-star heats their brains to this disease. Why then shoud I, enco•raging the bad,Turn Rebel, and run popularly mad?Were he a Tyrant who, by lawless Might,Opprest the Jews, and raised the Iebusite,
        Well might I mourn; but Natures hely bandsWoud curb my spirits, and restrain my hand:The people might assert their liberty;But what was •ight in them, were crime in me. His •avour 〈◊〉 me nothing to require;Prevents my wishes, and out-runs desire. What 〈…〉 I expect while David lives?All but 〈…〉 Diadem he gives;And that: But there he paused; then sighing, said,Is 〈…〉 for a worthier Head. For when my Father from his toyls shall rest,And 〈…〉 the number of the blest:〈…〉 shall the Throne ascend;Of 〈…〉 Line where that shall end. 
His Brother, though opprest with vulgar spight,Yet dauntless and secure of native right,Of every Royal Vertue stands possest;still Dear to all the Bravest, and the Best. His Courage Foes, his Friends his Truth Proclaim;His Loyalty the King, the World his Fame. His mercy ev'n th'offending Crowd will find;For sure he comes of a forgiving kind. Why should I then repine at Heavens decree;Which gives me no pretence to Royalty?Yet oh that Fate, propitiously enclined,Had raised my Birth, or had debased my mind;To my large soul, not all her treasure lent,And then betraied it to a mean Descent. I find, I find my mounting spirits bold,And David's part disdains my Mothers mold. Why am I scanted by a niggard Birth?My soul disclaims the kindred of her Earth:And made for Empire, whispers me within;Desire of Greatness is a Godlike sin. Him staggering so when Hells dire Agent found,While fainting Vertue scarce maintained her ground,He pours fresh Forces in, and thus replies:Th' Eternal God, supreamly good and wise,Imparts not these prodigious Gifts in vain;What wonders are reserved to bless your Reign?Against your will your Arguments have shown,such Vertue's only giv'n to guide a Throne. Not that your Father's mildness I contemn?But manly force becomes the Diadem. 'Tis true, he grants the people all they crave;And more perhaps than subjects ought to have:For lavish grants suppose a Monarch tame,And more his Goodness than his Wit proclaim. B•t when should people strive their Bonds to break,〈◊〉 not when Kings are negligent or weak?〈◊〉 him give on till he can give no more,The thri•ty sanhedrin shall keep him poor:And every 〈◊〉 which he can receive,shall cost a •imb of his Prerogative. 
To ply him with new Plots, shall be my care;Or plunge him deep in some expensive war;Which, when his Treasure can no more supply▪
        He must, with the remains of Kingship, buy. His faithful Friends, our jealousies and fears,Call Iebusites; and Pharaoh's Pentioners:Whom, when our fury from his aid has torn,He shall be naked left to publick scorn. The next successor, whom I fear and hate,My arts have made obnoxious to the state;Turned all his Vertues to his overthrow,And gained our Elders to pronounce a foe. His Right, for sums of necessary Gold,shall first be pawned, and afterwards be sold:Till time shall ever-wanting David draw,To pass your doubtful Title into Law:If not; the people have a Right supremeTo make their Kings; for Kings are made for them. All Empire is no more than power in trust:Which when resumed, can be no longer just. succession, for the general good designed,In its own wrong a Nation cannot bind:If altering that, the people can relieve,Better one suffer, than a Nation grieve. The Iews well knew their power: e'r saul they chose,God was their King, and God they durst depose. Urge now your Piety, your Filial Name,A Father's right, and fear of future Fame;The publick good, that universal call,To which ev'n Heaven submitted, answers all. Nor let his Love enchant your generous mind;Tis Natures trick to propagate her kind. Our fond Begetters, who would never die,Love but themselves in their posteritie. Or let his kindness by th' effects be tried,Or let him lay his vain pretence aside. God said he loved your Father; coud he bringA better proof, than to Anoint him King?It surely shewed he loved the shepherd well,Who gave so fair a Flock as Israel. 
        
Woud David have you thought his Darling son?What means he then, to Alienate the Crown?The name of Godly he may blush to bear:'Tis after God's own heart to cheat his Heir. He to his Brother gives supreme Command;To you a Legacy of Barren Land:Perhaps th'old Harp, on which he thrums his Layes:Or some dull Hebrew Ballad in your praise. Then the next Heir, a Prince, severe and wise,Already looks on you with jealous eyes;sees through the thin disguises of your arts,And marks your progress in the peoples hearts. Though now his mighty soul its grief contains;He meditates revenge who least complains. And like a Lion, slumb'ring in the way,Or sleep-dissembling, while he waits his prey,His fearless Foes within his distance draws;Constrains his roaring, and contracts his paws:Till at the last, his time for fury found,He shoots with sudden vengeance from the ground:The prostrate Vulgar, passes o'r, and spares;But with a Lordly rage, his Hunters tears. Your case no tame expedients will afford;Resolve on death, or conquest by the sword,Which for no less a stake than Life, you draw;And self-defence is Natures eldest Law. Leave the warm people no considering time;For then Rebellion may be thought a crime. Prevail your self of what occasion gives,But try your Title while your Father lives:And that your Arms may have a fair pretence,Proclaim, you take them in the King's defence:Whose sacred Life each minute woud expose,To Plots, from seeming friends, and secret foes. And who can sound the depth of David's soul?Perhaps his fear, his kindness may controul. He fears his Brother, though he loves his son,For plighted Vows too late to be undone. If so, by force he wishes to be gained;Like womens leachery to seem constrained:
Doubt not; but when he most affects the Frown;Commit a pleasing Rape upon the Crown. secure his Person to secure your Cause;They who possess the Prince, possess the Laws. He said, and this Advice above the rest,With Absalom's mild nature suited best;Unblamed of Life (Ambition set aside,)Not stained with cruelty, nor puft with pride. How happy had he been, if destinyHad higher placed his Birth, or not so high!His Kingly Vertues might have claimed a Throne;And blest all other Countreys but his own:But charming Greatness, since so few refuse;'Tis juster to lament him, than accuse. strong were his hopes a Rival to remove,With blandishments to gain the publick love;To head the Faction while their Zeal was hot,And popularly prosecute the Plot. To farther this, Achitophel unitesThe malecontents of all the Israelites:
        Whose differing Parties he coud wisely joyn,For several ends, to serve the same design. The best, and of the Princes some were such,Who thought the power of Monarchy too much:Mistaken men, and Patriots in their hearts;Not wicked, but seduced by impious arts. By these the springs of Property were bent,And would so high, they cracked the Government. The next for Interest sought t'embroil the state,To sell their duty at a dearer rate;And make their Iewish Markets of the Throne:Pretending publick good, to serve their own. Others thought Kings an useless heavy load,Who cost too much, and did too little good. These were for laying honest David by,On Principles of pure good Husbandry. With them joyned all th' Haranguers of the throng,That thought to get Preferment by the •o•gue. Who follow next, a double danger br•ng,Not only hating •avid, but th• King▪
        
The solymaean Rout; well versed of old,In godly Faction, and in Treason bold;Cowring and quaking at a Conqu'ror's sword,But losty to a Lawful Prince restored;saw with disdain an Ethnick Plot begun,And scorned by Iebusites to be out-done. Hot Levites headed these; who puled beforeFrom th' Ark, which in the Judges days they bore,Resumed their Cant, and with a zealous cryPursued their old beloved Theocracy. Where sanhedrin and Priest inslaved the Nation,And justified their spoils by inspiration:For who so fit for Reign as Aaron's Race,If once Dominion they could found in Grace?These led the Pack; the not of surest scent,Yet deepest mouthed against the Government. A numerous Host of dreaming saints succeed;Of the true old Enthusiastick breed:'Gainst form and order they their power employ;Nothing to build, and all things to destroy. But far more numerous was the herd of such,Who think too little, and who talk too much. These, out of meer instinct, they knew not why,Adored their Father's God, and Property:And, by the same blind benefit of Fate,The Devil and the Jebusite did hate:Born to be saved, ev'n in their own despight;Because they could not help believing right. such were the tools; but a whole Hydra moreRemains, of sprouting heads too long, to score. some of their Chiefs were Princes of the Land:In the first rank of these did Zimri stand:A man so various, that he seemed to beNot one, but all mankind's epitome. stiff in opinions, always in the wrong;Was every thing by starts, and nothing long:But, in the course of one revolving Moon,Was Chymist, Fidler, states-man, and Bussoon:Then all for Women, Painting, Rhiming, Drinking;Besides ten thousand freaks that died in thinking. 
Blest Madman, who coud every hour employ,With something new to wish, or to enjoy!Railing and praising were his usual theams,And both (to shew his judgment) in extreams:so over-violent, or over-civil,That every man, with him, was God or Devil. In squandring wealth was his peculiar art:Nothing went unrewarded, but desert. Beggered by fools, whom still he found too late:He had his Jest, and they had his Estate. He laughed himself from Court; then sought reliefBy ••rming parties, but could ne'r be Chief:Fo•
         ▪ spight of him, the weight of business fellOn Absalom and wise Achitophel:
        Thus, wicked but in will, of means bereft,He left not Faction, but of that was left. Titles and Names 'twere tedious to reherseOf Lords, below the dignity of Verse. Wits, Warriors, commonwealthsmen, were the best:Kind Husbands and meer Nobles all the rest. And, therefore in the name of dulness, beThe well hung Balaam, and cold Caleb free. And canting Nadab let oblivion damn,Who made new Porridge for the Paschal Lam•. Let friendships holy band, some names assure:some their own worth, and some let scorn secure. Nor shall the Rascal Rabble here have place,Whom Kings no Titles gave, and God no Grace:Not Bul•-faced Ionas, who co•d stat•tes drawTo mean Rebellion, and make Treason Law. But he though bad, is followed by a worse,The wretch, who heavens Anointed dared to c•rse. shimei, whose youth did early promise bringOf zeal to God, and hatred to his King;Did wisely from expensive sins re•rain,And never broke the sabbath, but for gain:Nor ever was he known an Oath to vent,Or curse, unless against the Government. Thus heaping wealth by the most ready wayAmong the Jews, which was to cheat and pray;
The City, to reward his pious HateAgainst his Master, chose him Magistrat:His hand a Vare of Justice did uphold;His Neck was loaded with a Chain of Gold. During his Office, Treason was no Crime;The sons of Belial had a glorious Time:For shimei, though not prodigal of pelf,Yet loved his wicked Neighbour as himself:When to or three were gathered to declaimAgainst the Monarch of Ierusalem,
        shimei was always in the midst of them. And, if they Curst the King when he was by,Woud rather Curse, than break good Company. If any durst his Factious Friends accuse,He pact a Jury of dissenting Iews:
        Whose fellow-feeling, in the godly Cause,Woud free the suffring saint from humane Laws. For Laws are only made to punish those,Who serve the King, and to protect his Foes. If any leisure time he had from power,(Because 'tis sin to misimploy an hour;)His b•siness was, by writing, to Persuade,That Kings were Useless, and a Clog to Trade:And, that his noble stile he might refine,No Rechabite more shund the fumes of Wine. Chast were his Cellars; and his shrieval BoardThe Grossness of a City Feast abhored:His Cooks, with long disuse, their Trade •orgot;Cool was his Kitchen; tho his Brains were hot. such •rugall Vertue Malice may accuse;But sure 'twas necessary to the Iews:
        For Towns one bur•t, s•ch Magistrates requireAs dare not tempt Gods Providence by fire. With spiritual food he fed his servants well,But free from flesh that made the Jews Rebel:And Moses's Laws he held in more account,For forty days of F•sting in the Mount. To speak the rest, who better are forgot,Would tyre a well breathed Witness of the Plot:
Yet, Corah, thou shalt from oblivion pass;Erect thy self thou Monumental Brass:High as the serpent of thy metal made,While Nations stand secure beneath thy shade. What tho his Birth were base, yet Comets riseFrom earthy vapours ere they shine in skies. Prodigious Actions may as well be doneBy Weaver's Issue, as by Prince's son. This Arch-Attestor for the publick good,By that one Deed Enobles all his Blood. Who ever asked the Witnesses high race,VVhose Oath with Martyrdom did stephen grace?Ours was a Levite, and as times went then,His Tribe were Godalmighty's Gentlemen. sunk were his eyes, his voice was harsh and loud,sure signs he neither cholerick was, nor proud:His long chin proved his wit; his saintlike graceA Church Vermilion, and a Moses's face;His memory, miraculously great,Could Plots, exceeding mans belief, repeat;VVhich, therefore cannot be accounted lies,For humane wit coud never such devise. some future Tr•ths are mingled in his Book;But, where the witness failed, the Prophet spoke:some things like visionary slights appear;The spirit caught him up, the Lord knows where:And gave him his Rabinical degreeUnknown to Foreign University. His judgment yet his mem'ry did excel;VVhich peiced his wondrous Evidence so well:And suited to the temper of the times;Then groaning under Jebusitick crimes. Let Israel, foes suspect his heavenly call,And rashly judge his wit Apocryphal;Our Laws for such affronts have for•eits made:He takes his li•e, who takes away his trade. VVere I my sel• in witness Corahs place,The wretch who did me such a dire disgrace,should whet my memory, though once forgot,To make him an A•pendix of my Plot. 
His zeal to heaven, made him his Prince despise,And load his person with indignities:But zeal peculiar priviledg affords;Indulging latitude to deeds and words. And Corah might for Agag's murther call,In terms as course as samuel used to saul. 
        What others in his Evidence did joyn,(The best that coud be had for love or coyn,)In Corah's own predicament will fall:For witness is a common name to all. surrounded thus with friends of every sort,Deluded Absalom, forsakes the Court:Impatient of high hopes, urged with renown:And fired with near possession of a Crown,Th' admiring Croud are dazled with surprize,And on his goodly person feed their eyes:His Joy Concealed, he sets himself to show:On each side bowing popularly low:His looks, his gestures, and his words he frams,And with familiar ease repeats their Names. Thus, formed by Nature, furnished out with Arts,He glides unfelt into their secret hearts:Then, with a kind compassionating look,And sighs, bespeaking pity e'r he spoke:Few words he said; but easy those and fit:More slow than Hybla drops, and far more sweet. I mourn, my Countrymen, your lost Estate;Tho far unable to prevent your sate:Behold a Banish't man, for your dear causeExposed a prey to Arbitrary Laws!Yet oh! that I alone coud be undone,Cut of from Empire, and no more a son!Now all your Liberties a spoil are made;Aegypt and Tyrus intercept your Trade,And Iebusites your sacred Rites invade. My Father, whom with reverence yet I Name,Charmed into Ease, is careless of his Fame:And, bribed with petty sums of Forreign Gold,Is grown in Batsheba's Embraces old:
Exalts his Enemies, his Friends destroys:And all his power against himself employs. He gives, and let him give my right away:But why should he his own, and yours betray?He only, he can make the Nation bleed,And he alone from my revenge is freed. Take then my tears (with that he wiped his Eyes)Tis all the Aid my present power supplies:No Court Informer can these Arms accuse;These Arms may sons against their Fathers use,And, 'tis my wish, the next successor's ReignMay make no other Israelite complain. Youth, Beauty, Gracefull Action, seldom fail:But Common Interest always will prevail:And pity never Ceases to be shownTo him, who makes the peoples wrongs his own. The Croud, (that still believe their Kings oppress)With lifted hands their young Messiah bles•:Who now begins his Progress to ordain;With Chariots, Horsemen, and a num'rous train:From East to West his Glories he displaies:And, like the sun, the promised Land survays. Fame runs before him as the morning-star;And shouts of Joy salute him from afar:Each house receives him as a Guardian God;And Consecrates the place of his abode;But hospitable treats did most commendWise Issachar, his wealthy western friend. This moving Court, that caught the peoples Eyes:And seemed but pomp, did other ends disguise. Achitophel had formed it with intentTo sound the depth, and fathom where it went:The people's hearts, distinguish Friends from Foes;And trie their strength, before they come to blowsYet all was coloured with a smooth pretenceOf specious love, and duty to their Prince. Religion, and Redress of Grievances,Two names, that always cheat and always please,Are often urged; and good king David's li•eIndangered by a Brother and a Wife. 
Thus in a Pageant show, a Plot is made;And Peace it self is War in Masquerâde. Oh foolish Israel! never warned by ill,still the same baite, and circumvented still!Did ever men forsake their present ease,In midst of health Imagine a desease;Take pains Contingent mischiefs to foresee,Make Heirs for Monarchs, and for God decree?What shall we think! can people give awayBoth for themselves and sons, their Native sway?Then they are left Defensless, to the swordOf each unbounded Arbitrary Lord:And Laws are vain, by which we Right enjoy,If Kings unquestioned can those laws destroy. Yet, if the Crowd be Judge of fit and Just,And Kings are onely Officers in trust,Then this resuming Cov'nant was declaredWhen Kings were made, or is for ever bared:If those who gave the scepter, could not tyeBy their own deed their own Posterity,How then coud Adam bind his future Race?How coud his for•eit on mankind take place?Or how coud heavenly Justice damn us all,Who ne'r consented to our Fathers fall?Then Kings are slaves to those whom they Command,And Tenants to their Peoples pleasure stand. Add, that the power for property allowd,Is mischeivously seated in the Crowd:For who can be secure of private Right,If sovereign sway may be dissolved by might?Nor is the Peoples Judgment always true:The most may err as grosly as the few. And faultless Kings run down, by Common Cry,For Vice, Oppression, and for Tyranny. What standard is there in a •ickle rout,Which, flowing to the mark, runs faster out?Nor only Crowds, but sanhedrins may beInfected with this publick lunacy:And share the madness of rebellious times,To marther Monarchs for imagined crimes. 
If they may give and take whn e'r they please,Not Kings alone, (the Godheads Images,)But Government it self at length must fallTo Natures state, where all have right to all. Yet, grant our Lords the people Kings can make,What prudent men a setled Throne woud shake?For whatsoe'r their sufferings were before,That change they covet makes them suffer more. All other Errors but disturb a state;But Innovation is the blow of Fate. If ancient Fabricks nod, and threat to fall,To patch the flaws, and buttress up the wall,Thus far 'tis duty; but here fix the mark:For all beyond it is to touch our Ark. To change Foundations, cast the Frame anew,Is work for Rebels who base Ends pursue:At once Divine and Humane Laws controul;And mend the parts by ruine of the whole. The Tamp'ring World is subject to this Curse,To Physick their Disease into a worse. Now what relief can Righteous David bring?How Fatal 'tis to be too good a King!Friends he has few, so high the Madness grows;Who dare be such, must be the peoples Foes,Yet some there were, ev'n in the worst of days;some let me name, and Naming is to praise. In this short File Barzillai first appears;Barzillai crowned with Honour and with Years,Long since, the rising Rebells he withstoodIn Regions waste, beyond the Iordans Flood,Unfortunately Brave to buoy the sate;But sinking underneath his Master's Fate,In exile with his Godlike Prince he mourned;For him he suffered, and with him Returned. The Court he practised, not the Courtier's art;Large was his Wea•th, but larger was his Heart;Which, well the Noblest Objects knew to choose,The Fighting Warriour, and Recording Muse. His bed could once a Fruitfull Issue boast,Now more than half a Father's Name is lost. 
His eldest hope, with every Grace adorned,By me (so heaven will have it) always mourned,And always honoured, snatched in manhoods prim•
        B' unequal fates, and providences crime;Yet not before the Goal of Honour won,All parts fulfil•ed of subject and of son;swift was the Race, but short the time to run. Oh narrow circle, but of power divine,scanted in space, but perfect in thy Line!By sea, by Land, thy matchless worth was known;Arms thy delight, and War was all thy own:Thy force, infused, the fainting Tyrians proped:And haughty Pharaoh found his Fortune stoped. Oh ancient Honour, oh unconquered hand,Whom foes unpunished never coud withstand!But Israel was unworthy of thy Name;short is the date of all immoderate fame. It looks as heaven our ruine had designed,And durst not trust thy fortune and thy mind. Now, free from earth, thy disencumbred soulMounts up, and leaves behind the Clouds and starry Pole:From thence thy kindred legions may'st thou bringTo aid the guardian Angel of thy King. Here stop my Muse, here cease thy painful slight;No pinions can pursue immortal height:Tell good Barzillai thou canst sing no more,And tell thy soul she should have ••ed before;Or fled she with his life, and left this VerseTo hang on her departed Parton's Herse?Now take thy steepy flight from heaven, and seeIf thou canst find on earth another He;
        Another He would be too hard to find,see then whom thou canst see not far behind:Zadock the Priest, whom, shunning power and place,His lowly mind advanced to David's Grace:With him the sagan of Ierusalem,
        Of hospitable soul, and noble stem;Him of the western dome, whose weighty senseFlows in fit words, and heavenly Eloquence. 
The Prophets sons by such example led,To Learning and to Loyalty were bred:For Colleges on bounteous Kings depend,And never Rebel was to Arts a friend. To these succeed the Pillars of the Laws,Who best coud plead, and best can judge a Cause. Next them a train of Loyal Peers ascend:sharp judging Adriel, the Muses friend,Himself a Muse;—In sanhedrins debateTrue to his Prince; but not a slave of state. Whom David's love with Honours did adorn,That from his disobedient son were torn. Iotham of piercing wit, and pregnant thought,Indued by Nature, and by Learning taughtTo move Assemblies, who but only triedThe worse a-while, then chose the better side;Nor chose alone, but turned the balance too;so much the weight of one brave man can do. Hushai the friend of David in distress,In publick storms of manly stedfastness;By foreign Treaties he informed his Youth;And joined experience to his native truth. His frugal care supp'ied the wanting Throne,Frugal for that, but bounteous of his own:'Tis easy conduct when Exchequers flow,But hard the task to manage well the low:For soverereign Power is too deprest or high,When Kings are forced to sell, or Crowds to buy. Indulge one labour more, my weary Muse,For Amiel, who can Amiel's praise refuse?Of ancient Race by Birth, but Nobler yetIn his own worth, and without Title great:The sanhedrin-long time as Chief he ruled,Their Reason guided, and their Passion cooled;so dextrous was he in the Crown's defence,so formed to speak a Loyal Nations sense,That as their Band was Israel's Tribes in small,so fit was he to represent them all. Now rasher Charioteers the seat ascend,Whose loose Carriers his steady skill commend:
They, like th'unequal Ruler of the day,Misguide the seasons, and mistake the way;While he withdrawn at their mad labour smiles,And safe enjoys the sabbath of his toyls. These were the chief, a small, but faithful BandOf Worthies, in the Breach who dared to stand,And tempt th'united Fury of the Land. With grief they viewed such powerful Engines bent,To batter down the lawful Government. A numerous Faction with pretended frights,In sanhedrins to plume the Regal Rights. The true successor from the Court removed:The Plot, by hireling Witnesses improved,These Ills they saw, and as their Duty bound,They shewed the King the danger of the Wound:That no concessions from the Throne woud please,But Lenitives fomented the Disease:That Absalom, ambitious of the Crown,Was made the Lure to draw the People down:That false Achitophel's pernitious Hate,Had turned the Plot to ruine Church and state:The Council violent, the Rabble worse:That shimei taught Ierusalem to curse. With all these loads of injuries opprest,And long revolving in his careful Brest,Th' event of things; at last his patience tired,Thus from his Royal Throne by heaven inspired,The God-like David spoke; with awful fearHis Train their Maker in their Master hearThus long have I, by native mercy swaiedMy wrongs dissembled my revenge delaied:so willing to forgive th' Offending Age;so much the Father did the King asswage. But now fo far my Clemency they slight,Th' offenders question my forgiving right. That one was made for many, they contend:But 'tis to Rule, for that's a Monarch's end. They call my tenderness of Blood, my fear:Though manly tempers can the longest bear. 
Yet, since they will divert my Native course,'Tis time to shew I am not good by force,Those heaped Affronts that hauty subjects bring,Are burthens for a Camel, not a King:Kings are the publick Pillars of the state,Born to sustain and prop the Nations weightIf my Young samson will pretend a CallTo shake the Column, let him share the FallBut oh that yet he woud repent and live!How easie 'tis for Parents to forgive!With how few Tears a Pardon might be wo•
        From Nature, pleading for a Darling son!Poor pitied Youth, by my Paternal care,Raised up to all the height his frame coud bear:Had God ordained his fate for Empire born,He woud have giv'n his soul another turn:Gulled with a Patriot's name, whose modern senseIs one that woud by Law supplant his Prince:The Peoples Brave, the Politicians Tool;Never was Patriot yet, but was a Fool. Whence comes it that Religion and the Lawsshould more be Absalom's than David's Cause?His old Instructer, e're he lost his place,Was never thought indued with so much Grace:Good heavens, how Faction can a Patriot paint!My Rebel ever proves my peoples saint:Would They impose an Heir upon the Throne?Let sanhedrims be taught to give their own. A King's at least a part of Government;And mine as requisite as their Consent:Without my leave a future King to choose,Infers a Right the present to Depose:True, they Petition me t' approve their Choise!But Esau's hand suit ill with Iacob's voice. My pious subjects for my safety pray,Which to secure they take my power away. From Plots and Treasons Heaven preserve my years,But save me most from my Petitioners. Unsatiate as the barren Womb or •r•ve. God cannot grant so much as they can Crave. 
What then is left but with a jealous EyeTo guard the small remains of Royalty?The Law shall still direct my peacefull sway,And the same Law teach Rebels to obey:Votes shall no more established power controul,such Votes as make a part exceed the whole:No groundless Clamours shall my Friends remove,Nor Crowds have power to punish e're they prove:For Gods, and Godlike Kings their Care express,still to defend their servants in distress. Oh that my Power to saving were confined;Why am I forced, like heaven, against my mind,To make Examples of another kind?Must I at length the sword of Justice draw?Oh curst Effects of necessary Law!How ill my Fear they by my Mercy scan,Beware the Fury of a patient Man. Law they require, let Law then shew her face;They coud not be content to look on Grace,Her hinder parts, but with a during EyeTo tempt the terror of her Front, and dye. By their own Arts 'tis righteously decreed,Those dire Artificers of Death shall bleed. Against themselves their Witnesses will swearTill Viper-like their Mother Plot they tear:And suck for Nutriment that bloody goreWhich was their Principle of Life before. Their Belial with their Belzebub will fight;Thus on my Foes, my Foes shall do me right:Nor doubt th' event: for factious crowds engageIn their first Onset, all their Brutal Rage;Then, let 'em take an unresisted course,Retire and Traverse, and delude their force:But when they stand all breathless, urge the fight,And rise upon 'em with redoubled might:For lawful power is still superiour found,When long driven back, at length it stands the ground. He s••d. Th' Almighty, nodding, gave consent;And P•als of Thunder shook the F•rmament:Henceforth a ser•es of new time began,The m•ghty Years in long▪ Procession ran:Once more the G•dli• 
         David was Restored▪
        And 〈…〉 knew th•ir Lawfull Lord. FINIs"
