"","x"
"1","AN
INTRODUCTION
TO THE
HIsTORY
Of the Principal
Kingdoms and states
OF
EUROPE. By sAMUEL PUFFENDORF,
Counsellor of state to the present King of sweden. 
      Made English from the Original. LONDON,
Printed for M. Gilliflower at the spread-Eagle in
Westminster-Hall, and T. Newborough at the Golden
Ball in st. Paul's Church-Yard. MDCXCV. 
      "
"2","To His EXCELLENCY,
CHARLEs
Duke of shrewsbury:
His Majesty's Principal secretary
of state;
Knight of the most Noble Order
of the Garter, &c. 
And one of the Lords Justices
of England. sIR,I should scarce have had the
boldness to prefix your great

Name to this Book: had I
not been fully persuaded that
the extraordinary worth of my
Author would strongly plead
for me to your Excellencies
Generosity. For, since my intention
was, that the sieur
Puffendorf's Introduction to the
History of Europe should appear
in no less Lustre in this Kingdom,
than it has heretofore done
in most parts of Europe; I could
not, without injuring a Person
so famous for his Learning, and
the rank he bears in one of the
Northern Kingdoms, submit his
Treatise to the Protection of
any other Person, than your
Excellency, whose judging Power
is so universally acknowledged:

If it endures this Test,
it must pass current in this
Nation. The high station in
which you are now placed by
the choice of the wisest and
bravest of Kings, having put
your Merits above the Praises
of a private Person; I shall rather
admire than pretend to
enumerate them, wishing, that
as your Actions have hitherto
been most effectual in preserving
your Country's Liberty,
so your Counsels may for the
future prove as fatal to the
French, as the swords of your
glorious Ancestor's in former
Ages. Thus recommending my
self to your Excellencies Protection,

I beg leave to subscribe
my self,Your Excellencies,
Most devoted servant,
J. C. M. D. "
"3","THE
PREFACE
TO THE
READER. THAT History is the most pleasant and
usefull study for Persons of Quality, and
more particularly for those who design for
Employments in the state, is well known
to all Men of Learning. It is therefore requisite, that
young Gentlemen should be exhorted early to apply
themselves to this study, not only because their Memory
is vigorous, and more capable to retain what
they then learn, but also because it may be concluded,
that he who has no Relish for History is very unlikely
to make any Advantage of Learning or Books. It
is a common Custom as well in Publick as Private
schools, to read to their scholars some ancient Historians;
and there are a great many who employ several
Years in reading of Cornelius Nepos, Curtius,
Justin and Livy, but never as much as take into
their Consideration the History of later Times. 'Tis

true, and it cannot be denied, but that we ought to
begin with the ancient Historians, they being equally
usefull and pleasant; but that the History of later
Times is so much neglected is a great Mistake and
want of Understanding in those to whom the Education
of Youth is committed; for I lay down this as
a Principle, That we are to study those Things in
our Youth, which may prove usefull to us hereafter,
when we come to riper Years, and apply our selves
to Business. Now I cannot for my life apprehend,
what great Benefit we can expect to receive from
Cornelius Nepos, Curtius, and the first Decad of
Livy, as to our Modern Affairs, tho' we had
learned them by Heart, and had, besides this, made
a perfect Index of all the Phrases and sentences
that are to be found in them: Or if we were so well
versed in them, as to be able to give a most exact
account, how many Cows and sheep the Romans led
in Triumph when they had conquered the Aequi, the
Volsci, and the Hernici. But what a considerable
Advantage it is to understand the Modern History
as well of our Native Country, as also its neighbouring
Nations, is sufficiently known to such as are
emploied in states Affairs. But it is not so easie a
matter to acquire this Knowledge, partly because those
Histories are comprehended in large and various
Volumes; partly because they are generally published
in the native Language of each Country; so that
he who intends to apply himself to this study must
be well versed in Foreign Languages. To remove in
some measure this Difficulty, I did some Years ago,
for the Benefit of some young Gentlemen in swedeland,
compile a Compendium, in which was comprehended
the History of such states as seemed to have
any Reference unto this Kingdom, with an Intention
only to give them the first tast of those Histories

fitted chiefly for their Improvement. But after
this rough Draught had fallen into other Hands,
I had some reason to fear, lest some covetous
Bookseller or another might publish it imperfect, as
I have known it has happened to others, whose Discourses
scarc• premeditated, have been published against
their Will and Knowledge. Wherefore I saw
my self obliged, notwithstanding I had but little
Leisure, to revise the said Work▪ and after I had
rendered it somewhat more perfect, rather to publish
it, such as it is, than to suffer that another should rob
me of it. I hope therefore, that the Discreet Reader
will look favourably upon this Work, not as a
Piece designed for Men of great Learning, but adapted
to the Apprehensions and Capacities of young
Men, whom I was willing to shew the Way, and, as
it were, to give them a tast, whereby they might be
encouraged to make a further search into this study. 
I must here also advertise the Reader, That because
I have taken the History of each Kingdom from its
own Historians, a great Difference is to be found in
those several Relations, which concern the Transactions
of some Nations that were at Enmity, it being
a common Observation, That their Historians have
magnified those Factions which have proved Favourable
to their Native Country, as they have lessened
those that proved Unfortunate. To reconcile and
decide these Differences was not my Business, but
to give a clearer insight into its History. I have
added also such Observations as are generally made
concerning the good and bad Qualifications of each
Nation, nevertheless, without any Intention either to
Flatter or Undervalue any; as also what concerns the
Nature, strength and Weakness of each Country. 
and its form of Government: All which I thought
might be an Inducement to young Gentlemen when

they Travel or Converse with Men of greater Experience
in the Affairs of the World, to be more
inquisitive into those Matters. What I have related
concerning the Interest of each state, is to be
considered as relating chiefly to that Time when I
composed this Work And, tho' I must confess,
that this is a Matter more suitable to the Capacity
of Men of Ʋnderstanding than young People,
yet I could not pass it by in silence, since this is to
be esteemed the Principle, from whence must be concluded,
whether state-Affairs are either well or ill
managed. I must also mention one thing more,
which may serve as an Instruction to young Men,
Viz. That this Interest may be divided into an Imaginary
and Real Interest. By the first I understand,
when a Prince judges the Welfare of his state to
consist in such things as cannot be performed without
disquieting and being injurious to a great many
other states, and which these are obliged to oppose
with all their Power: As for Example, The Monarchy
of Europe, or the universal Monopoly, this
being the Fuel with which the whole World may be
put into a Flame. Num si vos omnibus imperare
vultis, sequitur ut omnes servitutem accipiant?
If you would be the only Masters of the World,
doth it thence follow, that all others should lay
their Necks under your Yoke? The Real Interest
may be subdivided into a Perpetual and Temporary. 
The former depends chiefly on the situation and Constitution
of the Country, and the natural Inclinations
of the People; the latter, on the Condition,
strength and Weakness of the neighbouring Nations;
for as those vary, the Interest must also vary. 
Whence it often happens, that whereas we are, for
our own security, sometimes obliged to assist a neighbouring
Nation, which is likely to be oppressed by a

more potent Enemy; we at another time are forced
to oppose the Designs of those we before assisted; when
we find they have recovered themselves to that degree,
as that they may prove Formidable and Troublesome
to us. But seeing this Interest is so manifest to those
who are versed in state-Affairs, that they can't be
ignorant of it; one might ask, How it often times
happens, that great Errors are committed in this
kind against the Interest of the state. To this
may be answered, That those who have the supream
Administration of Affairs, are oftentimes not sufficiently
instructed concerning the Interest both of their
own state, as also that of their Neighbours; and
yet being fond of their own sentiments, will not
follow the Advice of understanding and faithfull
Ministers. sometimes they are misguided by their
Passions, or by Time-serving Ministers and Favourites. 
But where the Administration of the Government
is committed to the Care of Ministers of
state, it may happen, that these are not capable of
discerning it, or else are led away by a private. Interest,
which is opposite to that of the state; or
else, being divided into Factions, they are more concerned
to ruin their Rivals, than to follow the Dictates
of Reason. Therefore some of the most exquisite
parts of Modern History consists in this,
that one knows the Person who is the sovereign, or
the Ministers, which rule a state, their Capacity,
Inclinations, Caprices, Private Interests, manner of
proceeding, and the like: since unpon this depends,
in a great measure, the good and ill management of
a state. For it frequently happens, That a state,
which in it self considered, is but weak, is made to
become very considerable by the good Conduct and
Valour of its Governours; whereas a powerfull state,
by the i•l management of those that sit at the

Helm, oftentimes suffers considerably. But as the
Knowledge of these Matters appertains properly to
those who are emploied in the management of Foreign
Affairs, so it is mutable, considering how often the
scene is changed at Court. Wherefore it is better
learned from Experience and the Conversation of Men
well versed in these Matters, than from any Books
whatsoever. And this is what I thought my self
obliged to touch upon in a few Words in this Preface. "
"4","THE
TABLE. A. ANcient state of Mankind p. 1The Assyrian Empire 3Alexander the Great 9America discovered 44Peace made at Aix la Chapelle 244An Association of the Nobility in the Netherlands 259The Duke de Alva is sent into the Netherlands 261He causes the Earls of Egmont and Hoorn to be
beheaded 261Don John de Austria made Governour of the Netherlands
264The Duke of Alenson constituted sovereign over the
Netherlands 266Archduke Albert Governour of the spanish Netherlands
269Avignon, why once the seat of the Popes 410The House of Austria most zealous for Popery 424Albert Duke of Meclenburgh King of sweden 475B. THE Duke of Braganza proclaimed King of Portugal
under the Name of John IV. 65, 92Brasil first discovered in America 90〈◊〉 near Crecy betwixt the English and French
191, 118
Battle near Poictiers betwixt the English and French
p. 192, 119The Battle of st. Quintin betwixt the English and
French 140The Battle of Agincourt 198Brittainy united with France 204Battle of Pavia betwixt Charles V. Emperor of Germany,
and Francis I. King of France 212Mareschal de Biron's Conspiracy against Henry IV. 
King of France 233Briel taken by the banished Netherlanders 262Battle near Nieuport betwixt the spaniards and Dutch
270The Bohemian Tumults under the Emperour Ferdinand
I. 301The Crown of Bohemia offered to Frederic Elector Palatine
301Boteslaus Chrobry the first King of Poland 335The Battle fought near Warsaw in Poland 351Boris Goudenaw Czar of Muscovy 362Of making Bishops 383Battle fought near Leipzick in Germany 520Battle fought near Lutzen in Germany 524Battle of Norelingen in Germany 527A second Battle fought near Leipzick 530Battle fought in the Island of Fuhnen 534C. CArthage 12Constantinople the Imperial seat of the Eastern
Emperors 26Castile made a Kingdom 33Castile and Arragon united under Ferdinand and Isabella
42Charles V. 46His Wars with France 47Charles V. takes Rome 48Charles V. wages Wars against the Protestants in Germany
52Charles's Abdication 53His Death 53Catalonia rebels against spain 63
Charles II. King of spain 66The Canary Islands 73The Corfew Ball 106Calais taken by Edward III. King of England 119Charles I. King of England 148His Wars with France 149His Wars with spain 148Commotions in England and the true Causes thereof 149The Conduct of King Charles I. 151He is made a Prisoner 158He is sentenced to death and executed 159Charles II. son of King Charles I. routed near Worcester
160Cromwell made Protector of England 161Charles II. Restauration to the Kingdom 162His Wars with Holland 163Charles sirnamed the Great, King of France 179Is proclaimed Emperour of the Romans 179The Carlinian Family extinguished in France 182Charles VI. King of France 195Charles VII. King of France 199Charles VIII. King of France 204Conquers Naples 205Loses Naples 206Charles IX. King of France 221The first, second, third, fourth and fifth Huguenot
Wars under his Reign 221, 222, 223, 224Charles the Great 282Charles IV. Emperour of Germany causes the Golden
Bull to be compiled 295Charles V. Emperour of Germany 297He resigns the Empire 299Christian I. the first King of Denmark out of the Owen
burgh Family 322Christian II. King of Denmark crowned King of sweden
323He is driven thence, and afterwards out of his own
Kingdom 324Christian IV. King of Denmark, his defeat near Kings-Luttern
325The siege of Copenhagen 326Christian V. the present King of Denmark 327
He maketh War upon sweden p. 327Makes a Peace with sweden 328The Christian Religion is proper for all the World 370Is not contrary to civil Government 371No other Religion or Philosophy comparable to it 372Concerning the outward Government of Religion 372The consideration of this Question according to the Nature
of Religion in general, and of the Christian Religion
in particular 374, 375First Propagation of the Christian Religion, and by
what methods it was established 376Persecution of the first Church, and the C•lumnies raised
against the Primitive Christians 378The first Church Government 379Constantine the first Christian Emperour 382Could not quite alter the former state of the Church
382Of presiding in Councels 383Abuses in Councels 384Riches of the Church 394Croisado's, by what Politicks carried on 395How the Church was freed from all power over it 399General Councels to bridle the Popes power 409Cardinal Cajetan and his ill Conduct 418Calvin and Zwinglius 421The Conclave 431The College of Cardinals 433Cardinal Patroon 434Celibacy of the Clergy 435Their Number 436Ceremonies 439Half Communion 440Ʋnion made at Cilmar betwixt sweden, Denmark and
Norway 478Christopher Duke of Bavaria made King of sweden,
Denmark and Norway 482Church Lands reduced in sweden 494Christina Queen of sweden 525Continues the War in Germany 526Makes an Alliance with France 528Is engaged in a War with the Elector of saxony 527And afterwards with Denmark 530
Charles Gustave King of sweden 533siege of Copenhagen 534Charles IX. the present King of sweden 534His Forces routed by the Elector of 〈…〉 534D. THE Dutch sail to the East-Indies 92The Danes first come into England 102Dauphine united with France 192Denmark a very ancient Kingdom 316The Genius of the Danish Na•ion 328Neigbours of Denmark 330Disputes in England about the investiture of Bishops
403E. THE first sea Voyage into the East-Indies under Emanuel
King of Portugal 89Ancient state of England 99England conquered by the Romans 99Edward the Confessor King of England 103Edward I. King of England 114His Wars with scotland 115His Wars with France 116Edward II. King of England 116Edward III. King of England 117His Pretensions to the French Crown 117His expedition into France 118The English decline in France 201, 1•5The English driven out of France 202, 127Edward IV. of the House of York King of England 128Edward V. King of England 130Edward VI. King of England 139Elizabeth Queen of England 141she assists the Huguenots 144Refuses the soveraignty over the Netherlands twice
offered to her 145The Constitution of the English Nation 164The English form of Government 169The Power and strength of England 171The East-India Company in Holland 283, 270England and France declare War against the Dutch
279
Evangelical Ʋnion in Germany 301Erick declared King of sweden, Denmark and Norway
477, 321Of Episcopal Jurisdiction 384Concerning Excommunication 385Encrease of the Ecclesiastical soveraignty 391What contributed to it 391Disputes in England about the Investiture of Bishops
403Erasmus favours Luther 416Excommunication and Inquisition 445Erick XIV. King of sweden introduces the Titles of
Earls and Barons in that Kingdom 498F. FErdinand the Catholick and Isabella 42France and its ancient state 174The Franks came out of Germany 175France is divided 177French Pretensions upon the Kingdom of Naples 187French Pretensions upon Milan 196Francis I. King of France 210He aspires to the Empire 210His Italian Wars 211, 212His defeat at the Battle of Paviae, where he is taken
Prisoner, and set at liberty upon very hard terms 212Francis II. King of France 218The Nature and Constitution of the French 247The Government of France 250strength of France in regard to England and the
other Neighbouring Princes 251, 252Frederick Henry I. Prince of Orange 274Frederick Elector Palatine's ill success 302Ferdinand I. Emperour of Germany, his Proclamation
concerning Church-lands 302Frederick I. King of Denmark 324Frederick III. King of Denmark, his Wars with sweden
326Is declared absolute and the Crown hereditary 327Battle fought in the Island of Fuhnen 534G. GReece p. 6Gothick Empire and its downfall in spain 29Granada taken 43Gaul subdued by the Romans 174by the Barbarian Nations 174Germany divided from France 180The Gabel first introduced into France by Philip of Valois
their King 192The Treaty of Ghent betwixt the Prince of Orange
and the Netherlanders 264Germany and its ancient condition 282The Gvelfs and Gibellin Factions in Italy 291German Wars and their Origin under Matthias 300Gustavus Adolphus King of sweden, his death 303The Genius of the Germans 306Form of Government in Germany 307Its Commodities 307Its strength and Weakness 308Its Neighbours 312Gregory Pope of Rome excommunicates the Emperour
Henry IV. 402Endeavour to subject the Emperour 403The German Princes dissatisfied with the Pope 417The Gothick Nation and its first Founders 461The Goths and swedes united in one Kingdom 461Gustavus I. King of sweden 489Gustavus Adolphus King of sweden 511Makes Peace with the Muscovites 512Carries on the War against the Poles in Pon•ria 513Engages in the German War 515Lands his Forces in Germany and makes an Alliance
with France 517Is killed 525H. HEnry III. King of England 113The War with the Barons 114Henry IV. of the House of Lancaster invades England
121
After great difficulties surmounted becomes King of
England 122Henry V. King of England 122He invades France to prosecute his claim to that
Crown 123The Battle betwixt him and the French fought near
Agincourt 123Henry VI. King of England 124Is proclaimed King of France 125Is crowned in Paris 125Henry VII. Earl of Richmond invades England 131Is made King and unites the White and Red Roses 132Henry VIII. King of England 133His divorce with Queen Catharine 135He abrogates the Popes supremacy 136Marries Anna Bullen 136Demolishes the Monasteries 137Causes Anna Bullen to be beheaded 138His other Wives 138Hugh Capel the Founder of the present Royal Family
in France 182Henry II. King of France 215His Expedition into Germany 216His Project to unite scotland with France miscarried
217Huguenot Wars in France under Charles IX. the first,
second, third, fourth and fifth 221, 222, 223, 224Henry III. King of France 224The Holy League under his Reign 225Huguenot Wars in France the sixth, seventh and
eighth 225, 226, 227Henry III. forced from Paris by the League 227He makes use of the Huguenots against the League
228Henry IV. King of Navarre comes to the Crown of
France 228His difficulties, an Account of his Religion 228Is excommunicated by the Pope 230Changes his Religion 231Is assaulted and wounded by a Russian 231Is assassinated by Ravillac 234Henry IV. Emperour of Germany 286
His troubles with the Pope 287His son rebells against him 288Henry VII. Emperour of Germany poisoned by a Monk
294Henry of Valois Duke of Anjou made King of Poland
342st. Hierom's Dream 387I. JEsuites sent first into the Indies under John III. 
King of Portugal 90Ireland conquered by the English 111John King of England 112Loses Normandy 113James I. King of England 146The Independents become Masters in England 158Ireland conquered by the Parliament, Forces of England
160Constitution of the Irish Nation 166Jesuits banished out of France by King Henry IV. 231The spanish Inquisition in the Netherlands 257The long Inter-regnum in Germany 292Insurrection of the Boors in Germany under Charles V. 
299John Casimir King of Poland 349John Pobeiski the present King of Poland 352Constitution of the Jewish Religion 369Ignorance contributed to the Popes Authority 386Causes of this Ignorance 387Ignorance of Luther's Adversaries 415The Jesuits why they have taken upon them the Education
of the Youth 443Inquisition and Excommunication 445L. LEwis XI. King of France 202His politick methods 203Lewis XII. King of France 206Conquers Milan 206Conquers Naples 207
Loses it again 207Lewis XIII. King of France 234Takes Lorrain from that Duke 237Lewis XIV. the present King of France 238Is forced to leave Paris 240His differences with the Pope 243His Wars in Flanders 243, 244Takes Mastricht 245Leopold the present Emperour of Germany 305His Wars with the Turks 305With France 305Lithuania united to Poland 339Luther gives a great blow to the Grandeur of the Pope
412Pope Leo his Vertues and Faults 413Luther opposes Indulgencies, and afterwards the Popes
power 414Is favoured by Erasmus 416I'll conduct of Pope Leo and Cardinal Cajetan 418Why Luther's doctrine was not spread farther 419Laity debarred from reading the scriptures 437The licensing of Books 444Battle fought near Leipzick 520Battle fought near Lutzen 524A second Battle fought near Leipzick 530M. MAcedonian Empire 8Its fall 11Massanello's Rebellion at Naples 65The Maid of Orleans 200, 125Mary Queen of England 139she restores Popery 139Marries Philip of spain 140Mary Queen of scotland 142she marries Bothwel who murthered her husband 143she is made a Prisoner in England 143Is beheaded 144The Merringim Family loses the Crown of France 178Mazarine's Ministry under Lewis XIV. K. of France 238Mazarine banished France 241
And recalled by the Queen 241Peace of Munster 275, 239Mazarine's death 242Archduke Matthew made Governour by the Netherlanders
264Maurice son to William Prince of Orange made stadtholder
of the united Provinces 267Matthias Emperour of Germany 300Muscovy and its ancient state 361The Genius of the Muscovites 363Their Form of Government, strength and Neighbours
365What Commodities Muscovy affords 364Concerning Marriages 385Metropolitans 390Mendicants order, and the Motives to embrace this
manner of Life 396Is prejudicial to the regular Clergy 397Merits of good Works 439Marriage made a sacrament 440Maydeburgh taken by the Imperialists 519N. NAvarre conquered by Ferdinand the Catholick 46Normandy annexed to the Crown of England 108The Norman Race extinct 109Navarre taken and lost again in a few days by Francis I. 
King of France 210The Edict of Nants 232Peace made at Nimwegen 305, 246, 67The ancient state of the Netherlands 254Their condition under the Emperour Charles V. 255Causes of the Wars in the Netherlands under Philip II. 
King of spain 256They were fomented by Elizabeth Queen of England
258Constitution of the united Netherlands 280Their Genius 281Of their Country, shipping and Commerce 282, 283Their strength and Weakness 285Their Form of Government 286
Their Defects 288The Genius of the Norwegians 328Battle fought near Noringen in Germany 327O. THE Original of civil societies 2Origin of the Kingdom of Navarre and Arragon 3•
        The Original of selling Offices in France 202si•ge of Ostend 271Orders of Fryars and Nun• in general 396P. THE Persian Empire 4Philip King of Macedon 8Peace made at Cambray betwixt Charles V. and Francis
I. 213, 49Peace made at Crespy betwixt Charles V. and Francis. 
I. 215, 52Peace betwixt spain and France 53Treaty at Passaw 299, 52Philip II. King of spain 54His Wars with England 55Peace made at Vervin betwixt France and spain 232, 57Portugal falls to spain 91, 59Philip III. King of spain 59Philip IV. King of spain 91Portugal falls off from spain 64, 92Pyrenean Treaty 242, 65Peace with Portugal 66Peace made at Aix la Chapelle 66Peace made at Nimwegen 246, 67The Phillippine Islands 74The Kingdom of Portugal and its Origin 81The first Project of sailing into the East-Indies 88The Portugueses banish the Moors and Jews 88Peace betwixt Holland and Portugal 93The Humour of the Portugueses 94A Persecution raised on the Christians of Japan 96strength of Portugal 97Peter's Pence 101Peace made betwixt the English and French 119
Of no long continuance 120Another Peace with France under R. II. K. of Eng. 170The Powder Plot under James I. King of England 147Pharamond the first King of France 175Pipin proclaimed King of France 178The Parisian Massacre 223Pignerol bought from the Duke of savoy by Lewis XIII. 
King of France 236Peace of Munster 275, 239Peace made at Aixla Chapelle 244The Duke of Parma Governour of the Netherlands 265Protestants and the rise of that Name 298Protestant League at smalkald 298The differences betwixt the Protestants in Germany 312The Kingdom of Poland and its Origin 333Twelve Vaivodes or Governours in Poland 333The Poles defeated in Moldavia 346Poland invaded by Gustavus Adolfus K. of sweden 347The Poles defeated by the Cosacks 349Poland invaded by Gustavus Adolf. a second time 350Poland invaded by Ragezi Prince of Transilvania 351The Genius of the Polish Nation 352The Kingdom of Poland, its strength and Weakness,
Form of Government, its Commodities, Revenues, &c. 
353, 354, 355. Of the Pope of Rome 368The Popes Authority and its Origin. 386Pedantry introduced into the schools 388The Greek and Roman Politicians prejudicial to Monarchy
388Patriarchs 390Of the Popes Power 390The Popes Confirmation of Bishops 391How the Popes withdrew themselves from their subjection
to the Emperours 399The Pope seeks for protection in France 400The Pope establishes an ecclesiastical sovereignty 402The Pope pretends to a power over Princes, even to depose
them 404How this power is coloured over 405The Papal Authority opposed and weakned by schisms 407Divisions among the Protestants, and the Licentiousness
of some Protestants 420
The Ʋniversity of Paris 420The Popish soveraignty recovered 422Popish Clergy more regular and learned than before 422How they make Converts 423The Popes temporal state, his Dominions, Forces, how
he stands with relation to Germany, spain and
France. 424, 425Popish Monarchy as spiritual, its particular Constitution
426Why it was to be exercised in the Form of a Monarchy
429Why it must be elective 430Why the Pope was to live in the state of Celibacy 431Popish Doctrine suited to the state 436Penance 439Purgatory 441Prayers to saints 441The main Pillar of the Popish Monarchy 451The Popes Inclination towards the Protestants 452No Peace to be expected betwixt the Roman Catholicks
and Protestants 453strength of the Protestants and Papists 454The Protestant Religion estabished in sweden 495R. ROme a Warlike City 13Its military Institutions 15Religion of the Romans 17Roman Kings expelled, and a new form of Government
erected 19Defects of the Roman Commonwealth 21In Rome were two distinct Bodies 23The Rom. Monarchy could not be of long continuance 25Rome taken by Charles V. 49The Romans conquer England 99Richard I. King of England 111His expedition into the Holy Land 111Richard II. King of England 120Richard III. King of England 131Rebellion begins in England under Charles I. 157Richlieu made chief Minist. of state under Lew. III. 235Rochelle taken from the French Huguenots 235Rudolf Earl of Habsburgh the first Founder of the present
House of Austria 292
The Reformation in Germany 297The Roman spiritual Monarchy 368The Romans and their politick Reason against the Primitive
Christian Church 378Rome, why it was made the Place of Residence of the Ecclesiastical
Monarchy 389Reliques 441Reformation begun in sweden 491s. sParta 7spain and its ancient state 28spain conquered by the West Goths 28By the saracens 30Great Divisions in spain 34The sicilian Vespers 188, 39First Beginning of the spanish Inquisition 43spanish Armado destroyed 145, 56The Nature of the spaniards 67The spanish West-Indies 69Its several sorts of Inhabitants, and Its Riches 71, 72sardinia and sicily 74spanish Netherlands 74strength and Weakness of spain 75Its condition in reference to its Neighbours 77The saxons come into Britany 100The saxon Heptarchy 101The scotch defeated by the English 119The scotch Covenant 154The constitution of the scotch Nation 165spain enters into the Holy League in France 226The slingers in France 239The switzers, and the first original of their Commonweal▪ 273Their first Union 274Their Genius 279Their strength and Weakness 279League at smalkald 298stephen Batori made King of Poland 342He puts the Cosacks in good Discipline 342sigismund III. King of Poland 343His Wars with the Muscovites 343His oversight during the troubles in Muscovy 345si•• Venial and Mortal 438states that are tyed by a particular Interest to the Church of
Rome 448, 449sweden the most ancient Kingdom in Europe 461The Christian Doctrine first taught in sweden 464Celibacy of Clergy introduced in sweden 468
The Kingdom of sweden made hereditary and the Popish Religion
abolished 497A new swedish Liturgy introduced 504sigismund King of Poland and sweden 506Is deposed 510The Nature and Qualification of the swedish Nation 535Their Condition, strength and Neighbours 536, 537TTRuce with Holland made by Philip III. K. of spain 60The Tripie Alliance 66The Templers suppressed in France 189Truce betwixt the Emperour Charles V. and Henry II. King
of France 216The Tartars make the first inrode into Poland 338Theodore Ivanowitz Czar of Muscovy 362Traditions 438First Translation of the New Testament into swedish 492V. THE Union of Utrecht, the Foundation of the Commonwealth
of the seven United Provinces 265They enter into a Confederacy with the English 267Uladislaus IV. King of Poland obtains a signal Victory over
the Muscovites 348The causes of the War with the Cosacks under his Reign 348The Universities have promoted the Popish sovereignty 442W. WArs betwixt France and spain and their first rise 44Wars betwixt Charles V. and France 47Wars betwixt Holland and Portugal 93William the Conqueror 104He conquers England 184, 105Intestine Wars in France under King Francis II. 218William Prince of Orange 256Is murthered at Delft 267William II. Prince of Orange 275He makes the two de Wits Prisoners 276They are murthered 280William III. Prince of Orange 277Wars betwixt the English Parliament and the Dutch 277A second War betwixt the English and Dutch 278Wars betwixt Charles duke of Burgundy and the switzers 276Wars betwixt France and the switzers 277The Westphalian Treaty 304Winifred the Monk 393Wars betwixt the Muscovites and swedes 5•2War betwixt the swedes and Poles in Livonia 511Zwinglius and Calvin 421"
"5","An Introduction to the History of
the Chief Kingdoms and states
now in EUROPE. CHAP. I. Of the Ancient Monarchies, and more especially
of the Roman, out of whose Ruines
arose several Kingdoms and states. §. 1. NO Man of Common sense, imagines, that
at the first Propagation of Mankind,The most ancient state of Mankind. there
were such Governments as are among
us at this time. But in those Times each Father,
without being subject to any superiour Power,
governed his Wife, Children and servants, as a sovereign. 
Nay, it seems very probable to me, that even
to the time of the Deluge, there was no Magistracy,
or any Civil Constitution; but that the Government
was lodged only in each Father of his Family. For it
is scarce to be imagined, that such abominable Disorders
could have been introduced, where the Power
of Magistrates and Laws was exercised: And it is observable,
that after once the Rules of Government
were Constituted, we do not find that Mankind in
general did run into the same Enormities, of which
God Almighty was obliged to purge the World by an
Universal Punishment, though the Root of the Evil
was remaining as well after as before the Deluge. It
seems also, that for a considerable time after the Deluge
this Paternal Government continued in the
World. 
§. 2. The Original of Civil societies. But the reason why the Fathers of Families
left this separate way of living, and joyned in a Mutual
civil society, seems to be, That among the Neighbouring
Families, sometimes Quarrels used to arise,
which being often decided by Force, drew along with
them very great Inconveniencies, to prevent which,
it was thought necessary for the Preservation of Peace
and Quietness among Neighbours, to referr the Decision
of such Matters to the Judgment of some of the wisest
and most Considerable among them. After the increase
of Mankind, it was also easily to be observed,
how difficult it would prove for a single Family to defend
it self against the Joint Conspiracy of a malicious
Party, to Oppose which, the Neighbours living so near,
as to be able to assist one another in case of Necessity,
did enter into a society Mutually to defend themselves
against their Common Enemies. That they might do
this with the better success, the Administration of the
whole society was committed to him, who appeared
most Considerable for his Wisdom and Valour. It is
also very Probable that such as by Common Consent
sought out new Habitations, chose a Leader, who
both in their Journey, and in the Country, which they
possessed themselves of, had the chief Direction of Affairs:
And this office of a Judge, Head, or Leader by
degrees degenerated into that sort of Government,
which Aristotle calls Heroical, which is nothing else
but a Democracy under the Authority of one of the
Citizens, who has a Power rather to Advise than to
Command the rest. And this seems to be the most ancient
Form of Republicks: for the Fathers and Rulers of their
Families could not so soon forget their Liberty, as not
to Reserve to themselves a share in the Government by
which their Consent was required to be given unto all
Matters, which were to be decreed in the Name of the
whole society. §. 3. At what time the first states were constituted. But at what time precisely these societies were
first Instituted, and which of them is to be esteemed
the most Ancient, is not easie to be determined; for
though commonly the Assyrian Empire is taken for
the first Monarchy, yet it is not from hence to be concluded,

that the same was the first civil society; since
it is evident that this Empire acquired its Greatness by
swallowing up Lesser states. And those Wars which the
Assyrian Kings waged against other states, do abundantly
testifie, that besides the Assyrian, there were also
other Civil societies even at that time in the World. 
And here is to be observed, that as all human Affairs
do not come immediately to Perfection, so were the
first Institutions of Civil society very simple and imperfect,The first states were very small and imperfect. 
till by degrees the supreme Civil Power, together
with such Laws and Constitutions as were requisite for
the maintaining of a Civil society, were instituted. 
The first commonwealths also were very small, and
their Territories of a very little extent, so that it was
easie for the Citizens to assemble, either to Consult or
to Defend themselves against a Foreign Power. It is
evident out of History, that the deeper you search into
the most ancient Times, the more separate small commonwealths
you will meet withal, out of the Union
of which great Empires in Process of time did arise,
some of those Uniting themselves by common Consent,
others being subdued by the more Powerfull. §. 4. Among these great Empires,The Assyrian Empire. the Assyrian is
commonly reckoned the most Ancient, the reason of
which may probably be, That those Parts were sooner,
and More Inhabited than other places, which being
later possessed had Fewer Inhabitants. Wherefore the
Assyrians might without much difficulty overcome one
small commonwealth after another, and by subduing
some, make way for an Entire Conquest over the
rest, that had not then learned the advantage of a
joint Power and Confederacy. The vast Armies with
which Ninus and semiramis (the first Founders of this
Monarchy) did over-power far distant Nations, make
the common Chronologies very doubtfull: But to settle
this is not to our present purpose. But by what means
the Kings of this vast Empire did bridle the Conquered
Nations, ought to be remembred, Two of them being
most remarkable. By what means this Empire was maintained. The First was, That they intending
to imprint an Extraordinary Character of their Persons
into the Minds of the People, they always kept themselves

very close in their Palaces, and being seldom to
be seen by any but their nearest servants, they never
gave Answer to their subjects Petitions but by them. 
Whereby they possessed the People that they were
much above the Common Rank of Mankind. The
second was, That every Year they used to draw a
certain number of souldiers out of each Province, and
these being Quartered in and about the place of their
Residence, and Commanded by such a one as was
thought most faithfull, these Forces struck Terrour
both into the subjects at Home and the neighbouring
Nations Abroad. This Army was again Disbanded
every year, and another drawn out of the Provinces,
that the General by the Authority he had with the
soldiers, might not be in a condition to Invade the
Empire. Its Fall. The Ruin of this Empire under sardanapalus,
is not so much to be ascribed to his Effeminacy,
as to this, That the Kings allowed too much Power
to the Governours of Provinces of so vast an extent. 
These grew at last too Powerfull for the Kings themselves,
who being lulled asleep by Voluptuousness (the
effects of Peace and Plenty) did not, as they used to do
formerly, by great Actions endeavour to maintain their
Authority among the People. Out of the Ruins of
the Assyrian Empire two new Kingdoms were erected;
Arbactes taking upon himself the sovereignty of Media,
where he was Governour, as the Lord Lieutenant
of Babylon did the same in his Province, both which
were afterwards re-united under the Persian Monarchy. §. 5. Cyrus the first Founder of the Persian Empire,The Persian Empire. 
did, besides what formerly belonged to Media, and Babylon,
also Conquer a great part of the Lesser Asia. This
Prince, besides other remarkable Constitutions, did wisely
institute this, as a most necessary one to preserve the
Peace of his Empire;By what means it was maintained. That in all Provinces, where he
sent his Lords Lieutenants, he Constituted Governours
of the Fortresses chosen out of the Commons, who being
not under the Jurisdiction of the Lords Lieutenants,
had their dependence immediately on the King. These
therefore living in continual Jealousies, served as a Bridle

to one another. The Lords Lieutenants, without the
Assistance of the Governours of the Fortresses, were
not in a Capacity to Mutiny against the King, who
not only Observed all their Actions, but also frequently
Informed the King concerning their Behaviour. From
the Governours of the Fortresses nothing was to be feared,
because, being of Mean Condition and a very Limited
Power, they were not capable of making any great
Factions, or drawing any considerable Party after them. 
Cambyses annexed Egypt to the Persian Empire. But
whenever the Kings of Persia did undertake to extend
their Conquests further, it always proved fruitless. Cambyses
did in vain Attack the Aethiopians, as Darius
Hydaspes did the scythians. And Xerxes was shamefully
beaten by the Greeks: But the following Kings,
Artaxerxes Longimanus, Darius Nothus, and Artaxerxes
Mnemon, did Manage their Affairs with more
Wisdom against the Greeks, whom they did not Attack;
but leaving them at rest, they quickly saw Intestine
Wars kindled amongst themselves; wherein they
so well knew how to play their Game, that by always
affording Assistance to the weaker side, they rather
protracted than finished these intestine Wars, till the
Greeks, quite tired and exhausted, were obliged to accept
of such Conditions of Peace as were projected by
the Persians, whereby each City being declared free
and independent of one another, Greece was disabled
hereafter to undertake any thing of Moment. Notwithstanding
Macedon, an obscure Nation of Greece,
proved the Ruin of the Persian Monarchy, through
a defect of Policy in their Kings, in not early Opposing
the Growing Power of Philip, by raising Powerfull Enemies
in Greece, against him and his son Alexander,
(which for great summs of Money they might easily
have done,) and thus have cut out so much Work for
these two Warlike Princes at Home, that they
could not have had leisure so much as to have entred
on the thoughts of Invading Persia: In the same manner,
as formerly the Persians had obliged Agesilaus
quickly to return into Greece. But being over secure
in their own strength, and despising Others, they drew
upon themselves their own Destruction. 
§. 6. Greece. 
         Greece was in ancient times divided into a
great many petty commonwealths, every one of
these being governed by its own Laws. Among those
in Process of time, Athens grew most famous, whose
Citizens for Ingenuity, Eloquence, and the knowledge
of Arts and science, surpassed all the rest; their Glory
increased exceedingly after they had signalized themselves
so bravely against the Persians. After this, by
adding of the Harbour of Pyreum to their City, they
made it very commodious for shipping, and acquired
such vast Riches, that by their naval strength they
subdued the Isles of the Aegean sea and the Coasts of
the Lesser Asia. But being puffed up with their good
success, they drew upon themselves the hatred of their
Allies: and after they once attempted to be sole Masters
of Greece, the Peloponnesians, headed by the spartans
(who especially envied the Athenians) united together
to chastise the insolence of Athens. Yet the
Athenians behaved themselves so bravely, that the
War was carried on for a considerable time with near equal
success, till at last being vanquished in a Battle
in sicily, they also lost their whole Fleet on the Coast
of Thrace; then the Lacedaemonians becoming Masters
of Athens constituted thirty Governours, who tyrannized
most cruelly over such of the Citizens of Athens
as survived the storming of their City; yet Thrasibulus
having expelled the same with the assistance of
some of the banished Athenians, restored the City to
its former Liberty. After this, though the Athenians
did recover themselves a little, yet were they never able
to arrive at the former Grandeur of their commonwealth,
and being afterwards too forward in
making head against Philip, they were severely chastised
by him. It was therefore the immoderate Ambition
of the Athenians, and their desire of conquering
more than they were able to defend, which occasioned
their Ruin. For the number of the Citizens of Athens
did not exceed ten thousand, and they rarely receiving
others as Citizens among them, great Cities and Provinces,
could not be kept in obedience by such a number,
and with one unfortunate Blow their whole power
was struck down without Recovery. And considering

that such Cities are better fitted for their own Defence,
than making Conquests upon others, it is more
adviseable for them to mind the advantage of their
own Trade, than to inter-meddle too much in foreign
Affairs, and rather to keep safe their own Walls, than
to invade their Neighbours. sparta. Next to Athens, Lacedaemon
was famous in Greece, whose Citizens by the
constitutions and rigorous Discipline introduced by Lycurgus,
seemed to be most fitly qualified for warlike
Atchievements. This City having not any powerfull
Neighbour to contest withall, was strong enough to
defend its Liberty against the Neighbouring Commonwealths. 
And the spartans, as long as they, according
to their Laws and Institution, despised Riches, had no
great occasion to invade others: But as soon as they
began to aim at higher matters, they found by experience,
that it was a quite different case to conquer
Kingdoms, than to defend their own City. For having
had the good Fortune of subduing Athens, they
fell into the same folly which had been the Ruin of the
Athenians, and were not only for conquering the Asiatick
sea Coasts, but also under the Conduct of Agesilaus
they invaded Persia. But it was easie for the
King of Persia to find out means to chastise their Insolence,
who caused a diversion to be made by the Greeks,
that envied the success of the spartans, so that they
were quickly obliged to recall Agesilaus to defend themselves
at home. Not long after their Fleet being beaten
by Conon, Epaminondas defeated their Army by
Land in the Battle of Leuctra, whereby they were so
weakened, that they were scarce able to defend their
own Walls. Next to these two Cities, Thebes was for
a while famous, through the Valour and Wisdom of
Epaminondas, who so well knew how to head his Countrymen,
that they humbled the spartans, and as long
as he lived, were the most flourishing state of Greece. 
But after his death, this City returned to its former
state, and making head against Philip, was severely
chastised by hir•, and quite destroyed by his son Alexander. 
        
§. 7. Macedon. 
         Macedon was before the times of Philip an inconsiderable
Kingdom, and so exposed to the Incursions
of its Neighbours, that it was scarce able to defend
it self, this Nation being then esteemed the most despicable
of Greece. But by the Military Virtue of
two Kings, this Nation did show it self so considerable,
that it conquered a great part of the World. The circumstances
wherein the neighbouring Nations of Macedon
were at that time,The Politick Conduct and great Actions of Philip. 
          and the good Conduct of
Philip, whereby he so settled the Kingdom at home,
that it quickly became the chiefest in all Greece, gave
the first opportunity to lay the Foundation of this
Monarchy. For on one side it had for its Neighbours
the Thracians, Triballians, and Illyrians, very barbarous
Nations; these were easily kept in awe by a neighbouring,
wise and brave King. On the other side,
was Greece and its Cities, which, though they were
much fallen from their ancient Glory, yet, were all together
still too hard for the Macedonians. Against
those he made use of this Artifice, That by setting
them together by the Ears among themselves, he so
weakened them with intestine Wars, that they were
afterwards not able to hold out long against him. And
because Philip used only to attack one of those Cities
at a time, and the rest were not forward enough unanimously
to hinder his growing Greatness, he was upon
a sudden, before they were aware of it grown too
strong and potent for them all. Philip seemed particularly
endowed with great qualifications for this enterprize:
For besides the Vivacity of his spirit, he was
pushed on by an extraordinary Ambition to make himself
famous by great Actions. What real Vertues were
wanting in him, he endeavoured to supply with pretending
to the same; wherefore tho' he did nothing without
a fair Pretence, yet did he never stick at any thing,
provided he could obtain his ends, and was never sparing
in Promises or Oaths, if he thought he could thereby
deceive such as he intended to overcome. He was
an absolute Master of his Passions, and knew how to
keep his Counsels secret, how to set Friends together
by the Ears, and by pretending Friendships to both
Parties, to deceive them by vain hopes. He being also

very Eloquent, knew how to insinuate himself with
every body; and as for Money, he made no other use
of it, than to advance his designs. He was a most
experienced Warriour, and had made the Macedonians
so excellent souldiers, that the Macedonian
Phalanx, first invented by him, was terrible, even to
the Romans. And, because he was always at the Head
of his Armies, continually exercised his souldiers, and
punctually paid them, there were no better souldiers,
in his days, than the Macedonians. Being arrived to
this Greatness, so that he was chosen by the common
consent of Greece their General against the Persians;
and being busie in making preparations for this expedition,
he was barbarously murthered, leaving his son
Alexander the glory of pursuing it. §. 8. Alexander the Great. There is scarce in all History to be read of
an Expedition more famous than that of Alexander
the Great, wherein he, with thirty odd thousand Men,
conquered so vast and potent Kingdoms, and by his
victorious Arms extended his Empire from the Hellespont
to the Indies. If we enquire into the causes of
so uncommon and happy progresses; it is undeniable
that, besides the Providence of God Almighty, who
has put bounds to all Kingdoms upon Earth, the incomparable
Valour of Alexander himself had a great
share in the same; who having an Army of chosen
Men, fell upon his Enemy's Army with such swiftness
and vigour, that it was impossible for any new levied
Forces, though never so numerous, to resist him. Yet
Darius committed a grand mistake, when he offered
Battel to Alexander; it being evident, that the Persians
never were equal to the Greeks in Pitched Battels. 
Besides this, the Persians having lived for a considerable
time in Peace, had few experienced souldiers
among them; so that the greater the number was of
such undisciplined souldiers, the sooner were they
brought into disorder at the time of Battel. Darius
was ignorant of that great Art of protracting the War,
and by posting himself advantageously, and cutting
off the Provisions from his Enemies, to take off the
edge of fierce Alexander. And because he had neglected

to give him a diversion at home with the assistance
of the Greeks, who envied his Greatness, no other
Event could reasonably be expected, than what
afterwards followed. §. 9. He dies young. But the untimely Death of Alexander robbed
both him and his young Children of the fruits of his
Victories. For these, being young, lost not only their
Father's Kingdom, but also the fatal Wars carried on
after his Death betwixt his Generals, brought the conquered
Nations under great Calamities, who else would
have been in hopes to have changed their Kings for
a much better and greater Prince. But that it seemed
was next to an impossibility, that these so suddenly
conquered Countries should so soon be united in one
Kingdom. since a firm Union betwixt so many Nations
could not be established without a singular Prudence
of their supream Head, and a considerable time. 
We find also that a sudden Greatness is rarely lasting,
there being no less ability required to maintain, than
to acquire a thing of this nature. The Conquests
therefore of Alexander being of so vast an extent, that
the small number of his Macedonians was by no means
sufficient to keep them in awe; and to make those Provinces
dependent on the Macedonian Empire, there
was no other way to maintain such vast Conquests,
than to treat the conquered Nations in the same manner
with his native subjects, and not to oblige them
to recede from their ancient Laws and Customs, or to
turn Macedonians, but rather for him to turn Persian,
that the conquered might not be sensible of any other
change, but what they found in the Person of their
King. Alexander understood this very well; wherefore
he not only used himself to the Persian Customs
and Habit, but also married the deceased King's Daughter,
and had a Persian Guard about him. Those Writers,
who reprehend Alexander's Conduct in this matter,
only discover their own indiscretion. But to settle
a right understanding betwixt the Conquerours
and Conquered, did require a considerable time; to
effect which, Alexander seemed to be the fittest Man
in the World, as being endowed with a more than

ordinary Valour, Magnanimity, Liberality and Authority. 
If he had left a son behind him not unworthy
of so great a Father, the Persian Throne would
questionless have been entailed upon his Family. §. 10. Great Troubles after the Death of Alexander. 
          The Death of Alexander the Great was
the occasion of long and bloody Wars; For the Army,
puffed up with the Glory of its great Actions,
esteemed no body worthy of the supream Command;
And the Generals refusing to obey one another, were
grown too potent to live as private persons. 'Tis time
Arideus had the name of King; but this poor Man
wanted both Authority and Power to bridle the Ambition
of so many proud and great Men. Wherefore
all spurred on by their hopes, some of obtaining the
whole Empire, some of getting a considerable share,
they waged a most bloody and long War among themselves,
till their number was reduced to a few, from a
great many, who first pretended to the Empire. Five
of them took upon themselves the Title of Kings, and
the sovereign Dominion of their Provinces, viz. Cassander,
Lysimachus, Antigonus, seleucus and Ptolemy. 
But only the three last transmitted their Kingdoms
to their Families. There were then no more than
three Kingdoms remaining in the power of the Macedonians;
viz. That of syria, Egypt and Macedon;
That part of the Persian Empire which lay Easterly
beyond the River Euphrates, being become a vast new
Kingdom under the name of the Parthian Empire. 
The above-mentioned three Kingdoms were afterwards
swallowed up by the Romans,
         The Fall of the Macedonian Empire. and the Kingdom
of Macedon was the first, as lying nearest unto
Italy. For the Romans, after having subdued all
Italy, began to extend their Conquests beyond the
seas; and perceiving that Philip, an active King, bid
fair for the Conquest of all Greece; they did not think
it advisable to let him grow more Powerfull, he being
so near to them, that in time he might easily prove
troublesome to Italy. They entring therefore into a
League with the same Cities of Greece, which were
Attacked by Philip, under that pretence made War
upon Philip; and having driven him back into Macedon,
         
restored Liberty to all Greece. By which means
the Romans at the same time divided their strength,
and gained their Affections; at length they Conquered
Perseus, and with him the Kingdom of Macedon:
Then they turned their Arms against syria, and took
from Antiochus the Great, all that part of Asia which
extends as far as Mount Taurus. And though this
Kingdom did hold out for a while after, yet being
miserably torn to pieces by the Dissentions, which were
risen in the Royal Family, it surrendred it self to Tigranes,
King of Armenia. But he being Conquered
by Pompey, the Whole was made a Province of the
Roman Empire. Egypt at last could not escape the
Hands of the Romans, after the Emperour Augustus had
defeated Cleopatra and her Galant Mark Antony. 
        § 11. Before we come to Rome,
         Carthage. we must say
something of Carthage. This City having long contested
with Rome for the superiority, so that the Roman
Government did not think it self well secured, as
long as this City was in Being. This City, though it
was rather fitted for Trade than War; yet having acquired
vast Riches by its Traffick, and being vastly
encreased in Power and Inhabitants, forced not only
the next adjacent Countries in Africa to pay them
Tribute, but also sent vast Armies into sicily, sardinia
and spain. This occasioned the Wars betwixt
them and the Romans; the two First they maintained
with extraordinary Resolution and Valour, but in
the Third they were brought to utter Destruction. 
If they had avoided to meddle with the Roman Affairs,
they might in all probability have been able for
a great while to defend their Liberty. Ambition therefore
was the chief Cause of their Ruin, since the Constitution
of their Government was such, as being Adapted
for Trade, did not require any great Possessions,
except a few Lands for the use of their Citizens, and
some sea-Ports in spain and sicily, for conveniency of
Commerce and shipping. But the Conquests of large
Countries were more hurtfull than profitable to them. 
For those Generals who Commanded their Armies abroad,
proved at last dangerous to them, thinking it

below themselves after so much Glory and vast Riches
obtained, to be put in the same Rank with their Fellow
Citizens. The Inhabitants besides, of this City,
were not so well fitted for Land-service; so that they
being obliged to fill up their Armies with Mercenary
souldiers, collected out of several Nations, these were
a vast and certain Charge to them, the hopes of the
Benefit remaining uncertain. And besides this, their
Faith was very inconstant, and the Conquered places
could scarce be trusted to those, whose Faith might easily
be bought by Money. After their first War with
the Romans, they Experienced almost to their utter
Ruin, how dangerous it is to wage War altogether
with Foreign and Mercenary souldiers. And therefore
they could not possibly hold out against the Romans,
who fought with a much greater Constancy for
their Native Country, than these Foreign Mercenaries
did for their Pay. 'Twas a Capital Errour in the Carthaginians,
that they did not take care in time, so to
Establish their Power at sea, that they needed not to
have feared any thing from the Romans that way: But
after they had once let the Romans become Masters at
sea, they could not but expect them one time or another
at their City-gates. At the time when Hannibal
had such prodigious success against the Romans, it proved
also a fatal Neglect in them, that they did not
timely send fresh supplies to Re-inforce him, so that
he might have prosecuted the War to the Destruction
of Rome. For after they had once given leisure to
the Romans, to recollect themselves, they, conscious
of their former danger, never rested till they had rased
Carthage to the ground. §. 12. Rome a Warlike City. It is worth the while to trace the Commonwealth
of Rome back to its Original, because none ever
yet Equalled it in Power and Greatness, and because
young students are first Entred and best Read in the
Roman History. This City was perfectly made for
War, from whence the first had her Rise, and afterwards
her Fall. Its first Inhabitants were a sorry
Rabble of Indigent People, the very Dregs of Italy,
being ignorant of what belonged to Commerce, and

not expert in any Handy-craft's Trade. For the carrying
on of the first, Rome was not Commodiously
situated; and the Latter was at that time unknown
in Italy. That small parcel of Ground which
at first they had possessed themselves of, was not sufficient
to maintain a considerable Number of People;
nor was there any vacant Ground in the Neighbourhood,
which could be Tilled for their use. If therefore
they would not always remain Beggars, nothing
was left them but their swords, wherewith to cut out
their Fortune. And truly Rome was nothing else but
a Den of Wolves, and its Inhabitants, like Wolves,
always thirsting after their Neighbour's Goods and
Blood, living by continual Robberies. It was then
necessary for a City, under these Circumstances, to keep
up a constant stock of Valiant Citizens. To effect
this the better,Bywhat means Rome became so populous. 
         Romulus commanded, that no Child
should be killed, except such as were very Deformed;
which barbarous Custom was also then very common
among the Grecians. Besides this, he ordered that all
slaves at Rome, together with their Liberty, should
have the Privilege of the City, from whom afterwards
descended great Families, their Posterity being ambitious
by great Deeds, to Efface the Memory of their
base Original. But above all, one thing did mightily
contribute towards the Increase of Rome, that Romulus
did not suffer the Men to be put to the sword, in
such places, as were taken by force by the Romans,
nor would let them be sold for slaves; but receiving
them into Rome, granted them the same Privileges
with the rest of the Citizens. The Roman Writers
give this for one reason, why Athens and sparta could
not so long maintain their Conquests, as Rome did;
since they seldom Naturalized strangers; whereas Romulus
frequently used to receive the same as Citizens
of Rome in the Evening, with whom he had fought in
the Morning. For War cannot be carried on without
a good stock of Men; nor can Conquests be maintained
without a considerable Number of Valiant souldiers,
upon whose Faith the Government can rely in case of
an Attack. But that the Conquered places might not
be left destitute of Inhabitants, and Rome might not

be filled up with too much Rabble, they used only
to Transplant the best and richest Men of the Conquered
places to Rome, filling up their places with the
poorest of the Roman Citizens; who setling a continual
good Correspondence betwixt the Conquered and the
Romans, served also for a Garrison in these places. By
these means the most Valiant and Richest Inhabitants
of the Neighbouring Countries were drawn to Rome,
and the poorest among the Romans obtained thereby,
in those places, large Possessions. But although Necessity
gave an Edge to the Roman Valour, 'twas not
that alone that made them so War-like a People; for
the Courage of their Kings, who instructed them in
Military Affairs, and hardned them to Dangers, had a
great share in it; though, the thing rightly considered,
it is not always adviseable, to lay the Foundation
of a state upon Military Constitutions; since the
Changes of War are uncertain, and then it is not for
the Quiet of any state that Martial Tempers should
prevail too much in it. Wherefore Peaceable times
did never agree with the Romans; and as soon as they
were freed from the Danger of Foreign Enemies, they
sheathed their swords in each other's Bowels. §. 13. There were also other things worth our
Observation,several other Military Institutions. which did greatly advance the Military
Affairs of Rome. One of the chiefest was, That their
King servius Tullius had ordered, that only the most
able and wealthy Citizens should do service as souldiers,
and Equip themselves either with light Arms or
compleat Armour, according to their Ability: And,
whereas formerly every body, without distinction, was
obliged to serve the Publick in the Wars at his own
Charge; the poorer sort afterwards were never made
use of, but upon Extraordinary Occasions. And
though Riches do not make a Man the more Valiant,
yet was it but reasonable, since every body was obliged
to serve without Pay, that those, who were scarce
able to maintain themselves, should be spared as much
as could be: But besides this, their Wealth was a
Pledge of their Fidelity. For he that has nothing to
lose but his Life, carries all along with him, and has

no such strict Obligation to face Death; besides, that
he may easily be brought to desert his own Party, if
he meets with a prospect of a better fortune among
the Enemies. On the contrary, a wealthy Man fights
with more Zeal for the Publick Interest, because in defending
That, he secures his own, and is not likely to
betray his Trust; For if he deserts, he leaves his Possessions
behind him, with uncertain hopes of a recompence
of his Treachery from the Enemy. And, though
this Custom grew out of fashion under the Emperours,
yet, in lieu of that, they always kept part of
their Arrears behind, to assure themselves of their Fidelity;
and these were never paid, till they were dismissed. 
It is also remarkable, that, though the Romans
have been often signally beaten in the Field, yet did
they never despair or accept of any disadvantageous
Conditions of Peace, except what they did with Porsenae,
and the Gauls called the Terrour; to the first
they were fain to give Hostages, upon condition, that
they should not make any Iron-work, except what
was requisite for Tilling the Ground. Of which
shamefull Peace, the Roman Historians have cautiously
avoided to speak in their Writings. And the Gauls
were within an Inch of having put a period to the very
Being of Rome, if they had not been bought off
with Money, to Raise the siege of the Capitol, reduced
to the utmost extremity by Famine. For what
is related, that Camillus coming up just at the time of
the weighing out of the Gold, and drove the Gauls
from the Capitol, some look upon as a fabulous Relation. 
Upon all other occasions they have always born
their publick Misfortunes with an extraordinary Constancy. 
For, notwithstanding that Hannibal in the
second Punick War had reduced them to the last Extremity,
yet was not a word of Peace mentioned at
Rome. And when their Generals by Claudius and
Numantia had agreed upon shamefull Conditions
with the Enemies, they chose rather to deliver up the
Generals to the Enemies, than Ratifie the Treaty. 
They used also commonly to have but a small regard,
and rarely to redeem such as were made Prisoners among
them, to teach thereby the Roman souldiers, to

expect no deliverance but from their own swords. As
this Custom did oblige the souldiers to fight till the
last, so did their Constancy stand them in great stead
among other Nations. For he that shows himself
once fearfull of his Enemy, must expect to be Attackt
by him, as often as opportunity presents it self. §. 14. Of the Religion of the Romans. 
          It is also worth the while to touch a little
upon the Religion of the Ancient Romans, which,
though it was derived from the Greeks, yet the Romans
knew much better how to Accommodate it to
the advantage of their state. It was therefore from
the very beginning a constant Rule at Rome, not to
begin any publick Affairs of moment, without good
Indications or Presages: Because that the Event of
things is commonly supposed to happen according to
the Approbation of God. And therefore such as think
themselves assured of the good Will of God, undertake
and effect things with a greater Courage. These Indications
were commonly taken from Birds. Which
being a very ancient superstition, which took its Rise
from an Opinion of the Heathens, that the Gods having
their place of Residence immediately above the
Region of the Air, did make use of the Creatures of
the next adjoyning Element for their Interpreters. 
These Indications also were thought particularly usefull,
because the same were at hand at all times, and
the Motions and Chirpings of the Birds might be variously
interpreted according to the Exigency of the
Times, and the Affairs of the state. The cunning
Augrs or sooth-sayers made use of these Predictions
from the flight of Birds, to inspire the ignorant Multitude
either with Hopes or Despair, Valour or Fear,
according as it seemed most suitable and convenient to
the publick Affairs. Wherefore Cato the Elder, who
was an Augur himself, did not stick to say; He did
wonder, how one Augur, meeting another, could forbear
laughing, because their science was built upon so slight
a foundation. What the Romans did call Religion,
was chiefly instituted for the benefit of the state, that
thereby they might the better be able to Rule the
Minds of the People, according to the Conveniencies

and Exigencies of the state; quite in another manner,
than the Christian Religion does, which is instituted
for the benefit of the soul, and the future Happiness
of Mankind. Wherefore there were no certain
Heads or Articles of Religion among the Romans,
whence the People might be instructed concerning the
Being and Will of God, or how they might regulate
their Passions and Actions so as to please God: But
all was involved in outward Ceremonies; viz. What
sort of sacrifices was to be made, what Holy-days and
Publick Games were to be kept, &c. For the rest, the
Priests were unconcerned, as to what the People did
believe or not believe of Divine Matters; or, whether
after this Life the Vertuous and Wicked were to expect
Rewards according to their several deserts; or,
whether the souls perished together with the Bodies. 
For we see, that the Heathens have spoken very dubiously
concerning these Matters, and the wisest of them
have taken these things for Inventions wherewith to
keep the People in awe. But in their Ceremonies they
were most exact, performing the same with great
pomp and outward show, and rarely admitting of the
least alteration to be made in the same. All this was
instituted to please the humour of the Multitude,
which is most moved with those things, which dazle
the Eyes, and strike strongly on the senses. Wherefore
their Temples and sacrifices were not only extraordinary
Magnificent, but the Priests also were chosen
out of the most Noble Families, which served to increase
the Reverence of the People, that commonly
judges of the Value of things, according to the quality
of such as are employed about them. Yet besides this,
there was another Mystery in it. For, because they
made use of their Religion only as an Instrument of
state, to make the People pliable to the Intentions of
their Rulers; it was by all means necessary, that such
Priests were made use of, as understood the Interest of
the state, and did themselves also sit at the Helm of
the commonwealth. On the contrary, if the meaner
sort had been employed as Priests, they might easily,
out of Ambition, have, with the assistance of the People,
raised a Faction contrary to the Governours, since

the Multitude commonly depends on those of whose
sanctity they have an Opinion; or else out of ignorance
of the publick Affairs and the present Exigencies
they might chance to influence the People in another
manner, than was consistent with the present state
of Affairs. They prevented also by this way, that the
Priests could not form a particular Estate in the commonwealth,
and thereby either cause a mischievous
Division, or else strive to get the Power into their
own hands. §. 15. The Expulsion of their Kings, and the Erection of a new Form of Government. After Rome had been governed for Two
hundred forty and two Years by Kings, another Form
of Government was introduced, sextus Tarquin having
at that time ravished Lucretia. Whether Junius
Brutus had sufficient reason, upon this account, to expell
the King, may very well admit of Dispute. For
on one side the Fact was most abominable, and of
such a nature, that a brave Man would rather venture
at any thing, than bear such an affront. And there
are a great many Examples, that Princes, who, to satisfie
their brutish Lusts, have Violated the Chastity of
their subject's Wives and Daughters, and thereby lost
both their Lives and Crowns. But on the other hand,
it is to be considered, that a Fact, though never so
Criminal, committed by a son, without the Knowledge
and Consent of his Father, ought not to be prejudicial
to the Father and Family; much less could it
be a pretence to depose a King from a Throne, which
he lawfully possessed; Especially, since to take Vengeance
of Criminals does belong only to the King,
and not the subjects. And Brutus and Collatinus
would have had reason to complain, after the King had
denied them just satisfaction for the Fact committed
by his son, or if he had in any ways approved of the
same. But it is commonly observed, that in Revolutions
things are seldom carried according to the New form of
the Rules of Justice. And as there is commonly some
injustice committed at the first settlement of a new
Form of Government; so Ambition and Envy, covered
with Pretences of the Faults and Male-Administration
of the Prince, are the true Motives of Dethroning

the same. But not to insist further upon this, it
is certain that Kingly Government could not be durable
at Rome; For such states as are comprehended
in one great City are more fit for an Aristocratical or
Democratical Form of Government; whereas a Monarchy
is fittest to be erected in Kingdoms, where the
subjects are dispersed in a considerable Tract and Extent
of Land. The true Reason of this is, That Mankind
in general, politically considered, is like wild unruly
Creatures, ready upon all occasions to shake off
the Bridle of Civil Obedience, as often as Matters do
not suit with its humours. Besides, this Man cannot
be kept in Obedience without the assistance of Men. 
From whence it may rationally be concluded, why a
King, who Commands only over one great populous
City, is immediately in danger of losing all, as soon as
his subjects are disgusted at him, or another can insinuate
himself into their favour, except he is fortified
with a strong Guard of Foreigners, and a considerable
Fort; though these Remedies are very odious, and
oftentimes very uncertain. For when in such a Government
the Prince comes to be odious, the Hatred
is quickly communicated to all his subjects, as living
close together, and having consequently an opportunity
of uniting themselves easily against him. 
But where the subjects of a Prince live at a distance
from one another, it is easie for him to keep so many
of them inclined to his side, as are sufficient to suppress
the mutinous Party. Wherefore also they are
not so much to be feared, as being not able to meet
so soon, and to unite themselves in one Body. But it
is more especially very dangerous to Command over
subjects living in one place, of a fiery Temper, and
exercised in Arms. For Common sense tells us, that
he who will controul another, ought to have more
force than him. In the mean while, this is most certain,
that this Alteration of the Government mainly
contributed towards the Encrease of Rome; it being
not credible, that under the Monarchical Government
it could have arrived to that Greatness; partly, because
the Kings would have been obliged for their own
security to suppress, in some measure, the Martial spirit

of their Citizens; partly, because the Negligence
or Unskilfulness of some Kings must needs have proved
disadvantageous to the commonwealth. §. 16. Above all,Reasons of the fall of the Roman Greatness. it is worth our Consideration,
by what means the Roman Empire, which extended
it self over so considerable a part of the World, was
destroyed, and became a prey to the Northern Nations,
after it had been broken by its own Intestine
Troubles. The Causes of which we will enquire into
from their first beginning. The People of Rome then
being naturally of a fierce and martial spirit, and enclosed
together within the Walls of one City, their
Kings had no way left to secure their Obedience, but
by gaining their Affections with the gentleness and
moderation of their Government, since they had not
sufficient Power to balance the Forces of so vast a City. 
Wherefore the six first Kings kept the People in Obedience,
rather by their good Inclinations than Fear. 
But as soon as Tarquin the Proud began to oppress
the People with new Impositions, whereby he had so
alienated the Hearts of his subjects from him; it was
easie for Brutus, under pretext of the Fact committed
upon Lucretia, to stir up the discontented People, and
to shut the City-gates against the King. But as all
sudden Changes of Government,The Defects of the Roman Commonwealth. that are carried on
before things have been maturely considered, and all
Emergencies provided against, are commonly accompanied
with great Defects: so also was this at Rome,
where some things were admitted, and others left undone;
not so much because they conduced to the advantage
and safety of the state, but because the present
Juncture of Affairs would not suffer them to be
otherwise. There were also many Over-sights committed
in the beginning, which left a Gap open for future
Evils and Troubles. It seems to be evident, that
Brutus and his Associates, after they had expelled Tarquin,
did intend to introduce an Aristocratical Form
of Government: For it is scarce credible that they,
being Noble-men, with the peril of their Lives should
have expelled Tarquin on purpose to subject themselves
to the Government of the Common people;
but because no Wise man is willing to exchange his

present condition with another, without hopes of amending
the same: Therefore the chief Authors of
this Revolution were obliged, not only to render the
Kingly Government odious to the People, but also by
Mildness and Concessions to make the People in love
with the New Government. For if the Common people
had not been made sensible of the benefit they received
from the Government of the Nobility, they
might easily have opened the Gates again to Tarquin. 
Wherefore Valerius Papicola did strive to please the People,
especially in letting down the Rods or Fasces (the
Ensigns of Authority) before them, and allowing Appeals
to the People, as a tacit Confession that the supreme
Power of Rome did belong to them. It was by
all means requisite, if the Noble-men did intend to
maintain the newly acquired Authority, to have a particular
care of these two things. First, To take heed
that they did not exasperate the Common people
with their Pride; And, secondly, To find Means to
maintain the poorer sort, that they might not be
forced to seek for Remedies against their Poverty and
Debts by disturbing the Publick. But neither of them
were sufficiently regarded by the Nobility. There being
at that time no written Laws at Rome, and the
Nobility being in possession of all publick Offices, Justice
was oftentimes administred according to Favour
and Affection, the poorer sort being often, though unjustly,
oppressed by the more Powerfull. And because
the Citizens were obliged to serve in the Wars
at their own Charge at that time, when little was to
be got, they were thereby miserably exhausted; so
that they had no other remedy left them but to borrow
Money from the Richer sort. These used such as
were not able to satisfie their Creditors in so barbarous
a manner, by Imprisoning, laying of them in Chains,
and other Cruelties, that the Commons, quite put into
despair, unanimously retired out of the City; neither
could they be persuaded to return, before the senate
had agreed to constitute Magistrates, called Tribunes
of the People, who were to protect the Commons
against the Power of the Nobility. 
§. 17. Two distinct Bodies in Rome. 
          This was the Original and Cause of the
Division of the Romans into two Factions; viz. One
of the Nobility, and the Other two Parties of the Common
people: The continual Jealousies of which did
afterwards minister perpetual fewel for Civil Dissentions. 
It seemed at first sight but equitable and of no
great consequence, that the Commons might have
for their Heads some, who could upon all occasions
protect them against the Nobility: But in this the
Nobles did commit a grand Errour, that they allowed
to the Common people, which made the major
part of the City, a protection independent of the senate;
making thereby the Body of the Commonwealth
as it were double-headed. Factious Tribunes. For the Tribunes,
spurred on by Ambition, and the Hatred, which is
common in the Plebeians against the Nobility, were
not satisfied with affording their Protection to the
People against the Nobility; but also were always
endeavouring to be equal in Power, nay even to surpass
the senate in Authority. And first by their continual
Contests they obtained a Privilege for the Commons
to intermarry with the Nobles; Afterwards they
forced also the Nobility to consent that one of the
Consuls should be chosen out of the Commonalty. 
They took upon themselves the Power of a Negative
Voice, so as that no Decree of the senate could pass
into a Law without their consent, nay and even without
the consent of the senate to make Laws, and to
exercise the other Acts of sovereign Authority. The
senate, 'tis true, to divert and employ the People,
continually engaged them in one War or another,
that they might not have leisure to contrive any
thing against the Government. This, though it did
very well for a while, and the Power and Territories
of Rome were mightily thereby encreased, yet did arise
from thence some other inconveniencies, which
did not a little contribute towards the indisposition
of the state. For whereas the conquered Lands ought
to have been given to the poorer sort of the people,
whereby the City would have been freed from a great
many needy Citizens; the Nobles, under pretence of
Farming the same, took them into their own possession;

and what with these Revenues, and the great
Booty which fell in the Wars almost all to their
share, as being Commanders in Chief, the Riches of
the Nobles encreased prodigiously; whereas a great
many of the Plebeians had scarce wherewithall to
maintain themselves. The Commonalty being for
these Reasons extreamly dissatisfied with the senate,
there were not wanting some of the Nobility, and others,
of an ambitious spirit, who having taken distaste
at some Transactions of the senate, did, under
pretence of maintaining the Liberties of the People,
make a considerable Party among them, though, in
effect, their chief aim was, with the assistance of the
Plebeians, to carry on their ambitious designs. Those
being by force opposed by the senate, it came quickly
to a Civil War, and they sheathed their swords in
each other's Bowels. §. 18. In the mean time,Citizens too powerfull. partly by the vast Increase
of the Roman Empire, partly by Inadvertency
of the senate, another Evil had taken root; viz. That
vast and rich Provinces, together with great Armies,
were committed to the Government of some of the
Roman Citizens, and that for several years. From
which, as it created in them an aversion to a private
life, so it gave an opportunity to have whole Armies
at their Devotion. It is not adviseable for any state
whatsoever to let any of its Citizens mount to that
degree of Power. For he that has a potent Army at
his Devotion, will scarce be able to resist the temptation,
but will be apt to attempt to make himself sovereign. 
It is evident that the Ambition and great
Power of Marius, sulla, Pompey and Caesar did spur
them on, by Intestine Wars, to suppress the Liberty of
their native Country; and after Rome was quite broken
by them, to introduce an alteration in its Government. 
There was scarce any remedy left against this
Evil, after the Citizens had once laid aside the respect
due to the senate, and the souldiers had tasted the
sweets of the Booty got by Civil Commotions. Wherefore
this commonwealth at the very time when it
was arrived to the pitch of its Greatness, it returned again

to a Monarchy, but not of the best kind, where
the Army exercised sovereign Authority. The Constitution of the Roman Monarchy. 
         Augustus
was the first Founder of this Monarchy, which he by
his wife and long Reign, seemed to have established
pretty well: And truly this new introduced form of
Government, did for a while promise very fair, since
Augustus assumed only the Title of Prince, and maintaining
the senate and the rest of the great Officers in
their stations, took upon himself no more than the
administration of Military Affairs. But in effect, this
Monarchy was not founded so much upon the consent
of the senate and People, as upon the Power of the
souldiery, by whose assistance it was introduced and
maintained. And because the ancient Nobility could
not brook to be commanded by one single person,
and was always for recovering its former Liberty, the
Emperours left no stone unturned either to diminish,
or quite to extinguish the splendour of the ancient
Nobility; so that within the space of 200 Years, very
few were left, in whose places new Favourites of the
Emperours were created, who were willing to submit
themselves to their Commands. §. 19. But this Monarchy being founded upon the
souldiery,The Roman Monarchy could not be of a long continuance. could not be of a long continuance; for as
soon as the souldiers had once learned this secret, that
they being the supporters of the Monarchy, could
dispose of the Empire at pleasure, and that the senate
and People were now empty Names; the Emperours
were not only obliged with double Pay and great
Presents to purchase their Favour; but they also began
to kill such Emperours as were not pleasing to
them, and to fill up their room with such as could obtain
their Favour. And because one Army did claim
the same Prerogative as well as the other, not only
the Pretorian Bands, but also other Armies, which
were on the Frontiers, undertook to do the same. 
Hence came nothing but Misery and Confusion in the
Roman Empire, the Life of each Emperour depending
on the Will of the covetous and unruly souldiers, so
that no Emperour was assured to leave the Empire to
his Posterity. Oftentimes the bravest Princes were

murthered, and in their room others set up of the
meanest Rank and Capacity. Oftentimes two or
more were declared Emperours, who used to make
horrid slaughters among the Citizens in deciding their
Titles to the Empire. And this was the reason why
not only very few of the ancient Emperours died a
natural death, but also the Power of this vast Empire,
was diminished to that degree by these intestine Wars,
that it did appear no otherwise than a Body without
its Nerves. Constantine the Great did also hasten its
fall, when he transferred the Imperial Court from
Rome to Constantinople, and sent away the Veterane
Legions which guarded the Frontiers of the Empire,
along the Danube and the Rhine, to the Easterly
Parts, whereby the Western Provinces, destitute of
their Guards, became a prey to other Nations. Besides
this, Theodosius divided the Empire betwixt his
two sons, giving to Arcadius the Eastern, to Honorius
the Western parts; which division did not a little
contribute towards the destruction of the Empire. 
The Western Parts became a prey to the Germans and
Goths, who about that time came in prodigious numbers,
to change their poor Habitations for the pleasant
and rich Provinces of the Romans. England the Romans
left of their own accord, as being not in a capacity
to defend it against the scots, and having occasion
for their Troops to defend France. spain fell to
the share of the West-Goths. The Vandals settled
themselves in Africa. The Goths, Burgundians and
Francks divided France betwixt them. Rhaetia and
Noricum was conquered by the suevians and Bavarians. 
A great part of Pannonia and Illyricum was possested
by the Huns. The Goths settled a Kingdom in
Italy▪
          and did not think Rome worthy to make it
the place of Residence of the Gothick Kings. §. 20. Though the Western parts of the Roman
Empire tell to the share of Foreign Nations, yet the
Eastern Provinces,〈…〉 who•e Capital City was Constanti
           ••le▪
         
remained for a great many hundred years after▪
         〈◊〉 
         •his Eastern Empire was neither in Power nor
splendour to be compared to the Ancient Roman
         
Empire. And Agathias the Vth. says, That whereas
heretofore the Roman Forces consisted of 645000 Men,
the same did amount in the times of Justinian scarce to
150000. 'Tis true, under the Reign of this Justinian,
the Empire began to recover something of its former
Power, Belisarius having destroyed the Empire
of the Vandals in Africa, as Narses did that of the
Goths in Italy, because these Nations were grown Effeminate,
and overcome with the deliciousness of a
plentifull Country: Yet did it again decrease by degrees,
the neighbouring Nations taking away one
piece after another, the Emperours were partly in
fault themselves, some of them being sunk in pleasures,
and grown quite effeminate; others in continual
Divisions, destroying each other. One part was
subdued by the Bulgarians. The saracens conquered
syria, Palestine, Egypt, Cilicia, and other neighbouring
Countries, and ra•aging the rest, besieged Constantinople;
which City was once taken by Count
Baldwin of Flanders, but his Forces were obliged to
quit it not long after. The City also of Trebisond,
with the neighbouring Countries withdrawing from
the Obedience of the rest of the Empire, set up an
Emperour of their own choosing. At last the Turks
entirely subdued this Empire, who did not only conquer
the saracens, but also afterwards swallowed up
the Remnants of the Eastern Empire of Constantinople;
Greece having before withdrawn it self from
the Obedience of the Emperours, was governed by its
own petty Princes; making, thereby, the Conquest
of the Turks over them the easier; till, at last, the
City of Constantinople being taken by storm by the
Turks,
         Anno 1453. was afterwards made the place of Residence of
the Ottoman Emperours. CHAP. II. Of the Kingdom of spain. sPain was in ancient Times divided into a great
many states,The ancient state of spain. 
          independent of one another, which
was at that time the condition of most other Countries
of Europe. But, by reason of this Division,
this otherwise War-like Nation was very instrumental
to its being conquered by foreign Enemies. To this
may be added, That the spaniards did want good and
understanding Generals, under whose Conduct they
might easily have resisted the Power of their Enemies. 
For not to mention how the Celts passed out of Gaul
into the next adjacent parts of spain, who being mixt
with the Iberians▪
          were from thenceforward called
Celtiberians; neither how the Rhodians built Roses,
the Citizens of Zante saguntum, the Phoenicians Cadiz,
Malaga and other Cities, the Carthaginians, above
the rest, immediately after the first Punick War
with the Romans, began to conquer a great part of
spain. Wherefore in the second Punick War the Romans
did at first send their Forces into spain, where
they fought so long with the Carthaginians, till at
last, scipio, afterwards sir-named the African, made a
great part of it a Roman Province; the other parts
were subdued by degrees, till Augustus at last entirely
subduing the Cantabrians, who live next to the Pyrenean
Mountains, joined all spain to the Roman Empire,
under whose Protection it was peaceably governed
for a considerable time, except that the spaniards
now and then were drawn in to take a part in
the Civil Wars among the Romans. 
        §. 2. West Goths conquer spain. But the Western parts of the Roman Empire
declining, the Vandals, suevians, Alani and silingi
made an inrode into spain,
         410. and after many bloody
Battels fought, divided it betwixt them; which Conquests
nevertheless they did not enjoy long; for the
Vandals passing over into Africa, the Alani were quite

routed by the suevians, who having also subdued the
silingi, were in a fair way of becoming Masters of all
spain, if they had not been prevented by the West
Goths; who, after they had under the Conduct of
their King Alarick, ransacked Italy and Rome it self,
settled themselves upon the Borders lying betwixt
spain and France, making Narbonne the seat of their
Kings, who at first had under their Jurisdiction Catalonia
and Languedock, but soon after extended their
Power over other Provinces of spain. Among these
was particularly renowned their King Euric, who
took from the Romans all what was left them in spain,
except Gallicia, which remained under the Power of
the suevians: He also conquered several Provinces in
France. But Clodoveus, King of the Francks, having
defeated the son of Euric, retook from the Goths,
what they had conquered before in France, under the
Reign of Agila and Athanagildas; the Romans,
         554. who
had before rescued Africa from the hands of the Vandals,
retook a part of spain, but were chaced from
thence, for the most part, under the Reign of Levigildis,
who also did quite root out the suevians in
Gallicia. Under the Reign of his son Recaredus,
         572. the
Empire of the Goths was arrived to its highest pitch of
greatness,586. as comprehending not only some neighbouring
Provinces of France, and a part of Mauritania,
but also all spain, except a small part possessed as
yet by the Romans; from whence they were quite
chased afterwards by King suinthila. King Wamba
subdued the Gothick Rebels in France with great success,646. 
and beat the Fleet of the saracens,
         677. who much
infested those seas; but under Witiza the Gothick
Empire begun to decline from their ancient Valour,The Ruine of the Gothick Empire in spain. 
         
the Goths being much degenerated, till under the
Reign of Roderic it was quite extinguished. The
King himself contributed greatly to its sudden downfall;
for having ravished a certain Court Lady called
Cava, the Daughter of Count Julian, Governour of
that part of Mauritania which belonged to the Goths,
as also over that tract of spain which lies near the
streights of Gibral•ar; he to revenge himself for this
affront, first stirred up a great many of the King's

subjects against him, and afterwards persuaded the
saracens to pass out of Africa over into spain. These
to try their Fortune, first passed over with a small
number, but quickly encreasing by continual supplies
of Men sent from home, they vanquished such Forces
as Roderic sent in hast against them. After this success
the treacherous Julian understanding that Roderic did
intend to bring into the Field the whole Forces of his
Kingdom,713. which consisted of 100000 Men, brought
more saracens over into spain, who being joined with
the rest, did in a most memorable Battle intirely rout
this Multitude of unexercised and ill armed souldiers,
who were surprized to see one of their own party called
Oppas, with the Troops under his Command, went
over to the Enemy, and fell into their Flanck, together
with the Forces of Julian. Thus all was given
over for lost, and in this one Battle fell the whole
Power and splendour of the Goths, which had been
famous in spain for three hundred Years, Roderic himself
being killed in the flight,714. so that the Goths being
without a Head were quite dispersed,The saracens c•nquer spain. and all the great
Cities, partly by force of Arms, partly upon Articles,
fell into the Hands of the Enemy within the space of
three Years. Only Asturia, Biscay, a part of Gallicia
and some Countries next adjacent to the Pyrenean
Mountains remained under the Goths, rather, because
the Enemies did not think it worth their while to
drive them from these Mountainous places, than that
the Goths trusted to their own strength to defend
themselves against them. Into these parts also retired
such Christians as had escaped the sword of the Enemies. 
But all the rest of spain was inhabited by the
saracens and Jews. 
        §. 3. Kings in Oviedo. 
          To free spain from this Tyranny, was first
undertaken by Pelagius,
         Pelagius. who (as 'twas said) was descended
from the Race of the Gothick Kings. This
Man being chosen King,726. did recollect the remaining
Forces of this unfortunate Nation; and having brought
together an Army, obtained a signal Victory against
the Moors; and in the mean while that the saracens
were weakening their strength in France, took from

them the City of Leon, and several others. His son
Favila,
         Favila. who succeeded him, did nothing worth mentioning. 
But Alfonso the Catholick re-took several
Places from the Moors,
         Alfonso I. and reigned till the Year 757. 737. 
Whose son Favila also Valiantly defended his Kingdom,Favila. 
vanquishing the Moors in a great Battle. He
was killed in the Year 768:Aurelius. But his successor Aurelius
made a shamefull Peace with the Moors, by virtue
of which he was obliged to give them a yearly
Tribute of a certain Number of Virgins. He died in
the Year 774. silo. His successor silo did also nothing
worth mentioning, and died in the Year 783. After him
reigned Alfonso,
         Alfonsus I▪
          the son of Favila, against whom Mauregatus
taking up Arms, forced him out of the Kingdom;
who, to settle himself the better in the Empire,
craved assistance from the Moors, promising them a
yearly Tribute of 50 Noble Virgins, and as many others. 
He died in the Year 788. His successor Veremundus
did nothing Praise-worthy,Veremundus. except that he recalled
Alfonso, sir-named the Chaste; who refusing to
pay the Tribute of the Virgins to the Moors,
         791. gave
them several signal Defeats: But having no Children,
he made an agreement with Charles the Great, that
he should assist him in driving the Moors out of spain;
in recompence of which, he was to be his Heir in the
Kingdom of spain. Charles therefore sent his son
Bernard with a Puissant Army into spain, but the
spaniards not liking the agreement, as being not willing
to be under the Command of the French, arose
unanimously, and falling upon the French near Ronceval;
just as they were entring into spain, entirely
routed them; in which Battle the famous Rowland
was slain. Thus it is related by the spanish Historians,
but the French do not agree with them in the relation. 
Alfonso died in the Year 844, whose successor
Ramirus most gloriously ushered the spanish Liberty. Ramirus,
For the Moors demanding the Tribute according to
the agreement made with Mauregatus, he defeated
them in a great Battle, but could not take from them
many of their strong Holds, being with-held partly
by Intestine Commotions, partly by an Inrode the
Normans made upon him. He died in the Year 851. 

After him succeeded his son Ordonius,
         Ordonius I. who reigned
with great applause; he obtained a Victory over the
Moors, and took some of their strong Holds. He died
in the Year 862,Alfonso III. whose son and successor Alfonso, sirnamed
the Great, fortunately overcame the Rebels at
home, and the Moors abroad. But by laying too
heavy Impositions upon the People, he drew the hatred
of a great many upon himself, and was therefore
robbed of the Crown by his son Garsias. 
         Garsias. This King
Valiantly attackt the Moors,
         910. but died soon after. 
His Brother also was Victorious against the Moors▪
         
         913. 
transferring the seat of the spanish Kings from Oviedo
to Leon. 
         The Origin of the Kingdoms of Navarre and Arragon. 
          He died in the Year 923. But besides this
Kingdom of Oviedo, there arose several other Governments
in spain. For Garsias semenus erected a new
Kingdom in Navarre; and Aznar, son of Eudo, Duke
of Aquitain, having taken several Places from the
Moors, took upon himself, with consent of the before-mentioned
Garsias, the Title of Earl of Arragon. 
Lewis also, son of Charles the Great, taking Barcelona,
constituted a Governour there, whose Name
was Bernard, a Frenchman, from whom descended the
Earls of Barcelona. About the time also of the above-mentioned
Kings there were several Earls or Governours
of Old Castile, who acknowledged the foresaid
Kings for their soveraigns. These Earls being once
suspected by King Ordonius, he called them together;
who appearing, were all killed by his Order. Wherefore
the Old Castilians, under the Reign of his son
Favila,
         Favila II. a cruel Tyrant, with-drawing themselves from
the Kingdom of Leon, chose two Governours, under
the Name of Judges, who were to administer all Civil
and Military Affairs. But this Form of Government
did not last long among them. §. 4. Alfonso IV. After Favila Alphonso the IVth. obtained the
Kingdom, under whose Reign Ferdinand Gonsalvo,
Earl of Castile, performed great things both against
the Moors, and sanctius Abareus, and his son Garsias,
Kings of Navarre, whom he vanquished. But Alfonso
himself being unfit to Govern the Kingdom, surrendred
it to his Brother Ramirus;
         Ramirus II. who, with the assistance
of the before-mentioned Ferdinand,
         931. beat the

         Moors in several Places. He died in the Year 950, and
was succeeded by his son Ordonius,
         Ordonius III a Valiant Prince;
but did not Reign long, leaving the Kingdom to his
Brother sanctius Crassus. 
         sanctius. He was Banished by Ordonius,
sir-named the Wicked;
         955. but soon restored by
the help of the Moors. It is said that by certain Articles
made betwixt sanctius and Ferdinand, Earl of
Castile,
         965. it was agreed, that Castile after that time
should not be obliged to acknowledge any dependance
on the Kings of Leon. 
         Ramirus III. He was succeeded by Ramirus,
who,967. in his Minority, was under Womens tuition;
and when grown up, proved very useless to the
Publick. For, under his Reign, partly by civil Commotions,
partly by the In-roads made by the Moors,
the Kingdom was considerably weakened, and in great
danger of losing more, several Places being taken from
the Christians. 
         Veremund II. Under Veremund II. also, the Moors
did considerable mischief in those Parts,982. taking and
plundering, besides a great many others, the City of
Leon; to which Misfortunes the civil Commotions
did greatly contribute. But at last Veremund entring
into a Confederacy with the King of Navarre, and Garsias,
Earl of Castile, forced the Moors out of his Kingdom. 
Him succeeded his son Alfonso V. Alfonso V. under whose
Reign there were great Intestine Commotions in Castile,
         999. 
whereby the Moors were encouraged to attack it with
such vigour, that they over-threw Garsias, and took
him Prisoner, whose son sanctius revenged himself afterwards
upon the Moors. After this, great Dissentions
being arisen among the Moors, their Empire was
divided into several Parts, each Governour of its Province
assuming the Name of King. Alfonso succeeded
his son Veremund III. Veremund III under whose Reign there
happened a great Revolution in spain. For Garsias,
Earl of Castile,
         1025. being upon the point of being married
to the King's sister at Leon, was there barbarously
murthered by some of his Vassals. Castile therefore
falling to sanctius, King of Navarre, who had married
the sister of Garsias, he took upon him the Title
of King of Castile. This sanctius, sir-named Major,
also waged War against Veremund,
         Castile made a Kingdom. who had no Children,
taking from him, by force of Arms, a considerable

part of the Kingdom. Whereupon a Peace was
concluded, whereby it was agreed, that sanctius should
keep what he had taken before, but that his son Ferdinand
should Marry sanctia, the sister of Veremund,
she being Heiress to her Brother, and to succeed him
in the Kingdom of Leon. In this manner was Leon,
Navarre and Castile,
         sanctius II. United in one House: But in
the mean while that sanctius Major was in the Field
against the Moors,
         Major. a great Misfortune happened at
Home. He had particularly recommended to the
Care of his Queen a very fine Horse, which Garsias,
her Eldest son, had a mind to have, and would have
obtained it from the Mother, if the Master of the Horse
had not opposed it, telling them, that his Father would
be greatly displeased at it. This denial wrought so
upon the son, that he accused his Mother of committing
Adultery with the Master of the Horse. The
Matter being examined, the King's Natural son, Ramirus,
profered to justifie the Innocency of the Queen
in a Duel with Garsias, and the King being uncertain
what to do, a Priest did at last enforce the Confession
of the Calumny cast upon the Queen from Garsias;
whereupon Garsias being declared incapable of
succeeding his Father in Castile, which did belong to
him by his Mother's side, and Ramirus obtained the succession
in the Kingdom of Arragon as a recompence of
his Fidelity. This sanctius Major died in the Year 1035. §. 5. Thus all the Provinces of spain,
         The pernici•us Division of spain. 
          which were
possessed by the Christians, being joined in one House,
it seemed an easie matter to root out the Moors, divided
among themselves, and to restore spain to its
former state, if the same had remained under one Head. 
But the division made by sanctius Major occasioned
most bloody and pernicious Wars. This before-mentioned
sanctius had four sons: To the Eldest Garsias,
he left Navarre and Biscay; to Ferdinand, Castile; to
Gonsalvo, suprarbe and Ripagorsa; and to Ramirus
his Natural son, Arragon, giving to each of them the
Title of King. These being all ambitious to be equal
in Power and Greatness to their Father, and thinking
their Bounds too narrow, fell quickly together by the

Ears. For whilest Garsias was gone in Pilgrimage to
Rome, Ramirus endeavoured to make himself Master
of Navarre; but the other returning home, •hased
him out of Arragon. There arose also a War betwixt
Ferdinand of Castile and his Brother-in-law Veremund▪
         
King of Leon; wherein the latter being slain in Battle,
Ferdinand became Master of Leon, which did by
Right of succession belong to him. 1038. He also took from
the Moors a great part of Portugal. After the Death
of Gonsalvo, the Third son of sanctius Major, Ramirus
made himself Master of his Territories, and endeavoured
also to recover, by force of Arms, Arragon from
the King of Navarre. 
         1045. Not long after Ferdinand of
Castile, and Garsias of Navarre, waged War together
about a certain Tract of Ground,1053. wherein Garsias was
slain in a Battle. By his Death Ramirus got an opportunity
of recovering Arragon. Ferdinand, sir-named
the Great, died in the Year 1065, dividing the
Empire, to the great detriment of spain, among his
three sons. The Eldest sanctius had Castile, Alfonso,
Leon, Garsias Gallicia, and a part of Portugal, with
the Titles of Kings. 
         sanctius III. 
         sanctius waged War with Ramirus
of Arragon,
         1067. whom he slew in a Battle, but was
beaten back again by sanctius, son of Ramirus, and
the King of Navarre. Afterward having driven Alfonso
out of his Territories, and taken Garsias Prisoner,
he took possession of the Territories belonging to his
Brothers, but was slain in the siege of Camora, which
City he endeavoured to take from his sister. Then Alfonso
his Brother,Alfonso VI. who had hitherto dwelt with the
Moorish King of Toledo, made himself Master of Castile
and Leon. 
         1073. And took from the Moors, besides
some other Places, the City of Toledo, which was in
those days esteemed impregnable. 1085. But the Moors in
spain having received fresh Re-inforcements out of
Africa, got new Courage, and falling upon the Christians,
defeated them in two Battles, till Alfonso got
an entire Victory over them, obliging the Moorish
King of Corduba to pay him a yearly Tribute. Nevertheless
he was afterwards again over-thrown in a
Battle fought with the Moors, where he lost his only
son, sanctius, whose Death he revenged soon after

upon them. He died in the Year 1109. Ʋrraca his
Daughter was Heiress to the Kingdom, she being Married
to Alfonso King of Arragon;
         Alfonso VII. Which Marriage,
under pretence of too near a Consanguinity and Adultery
committed by the Queen, was afterwards dissolved
again. Alfonso VIII. But, because Alfonso would nevertheless keep
Castile as the Dowry of the Queen, it caused great Intestine
Wars and Divisions. For Alfonso VIII. son of
Ʋrraca by Raymond of Burgundy, her first Husband,
who was come out of France to assist her Father in the
Wars against the Moors, was proclaimed King of Castile,
in the mean while that Alfonso of Arragon was
busied in taking, besides some other Places, the City of
saragossa from the Moors. 
         1118. At last a Peace was concluded
betwixt Arragon and Castile. 
         1122. Afterwards Alfonso
of Castile made War against the Moors with great
success, taking from them divers Places of Note. But
Alfonso of Arragon being slain in a Battle,1134. fought with
the Moors, and leaving no Children behind him, those
of Navarre chose for their King Garsias, who was of
the Race of their former Kings: But the Arragonians
conferred the Crown upon Ramirus, Brother to the
deceased King, who had been a Monk. Alfonso of Castile,
in Opposition to both, pretending to have a
Right to these Kingdoms, conquered a great part of
them, causing himself, with consent of Pope Innocent II. 
who was supposed to do it in spite to the German Emperours,
to be proclaimed Emperour of spain. But
this difference was also at last composed, it being agreed
that Ramirus should give his only Daughter,
together with the Kingdom, to Raymond Earl of Barcelona,
by which means Catalonia and Arragon were
United;1137. then Alfonso entring into a Confederacy with
the Kings of Navarre and Arragon, Attacked again
the Moors, taking from them the City of Almeria,
which in those days was a great sea-port and Harbour
for Privateers. Raymond took from the Moors Tortosa,
Lerida, and other strong Holds. Alfonso died in
the Year 1157. §. 6. sanctius IV. The same Alfonso (though spain had suffered
sufficiently by its being divided into so many Governments)

left to his son sanctius, Castile; to Ferdinand,
Leon and Gallicia. sanctius, who did nothing, that
is remarkable, except that he beat twice those of Navarre,
died in the Year 1158,Alfonso IX. leaving his son Alfonso
IX. a Child of four years of Age. During the time
of his Minority, there were great Disturbances in Castile,
occasioned partly by the Divisions among the
Nobility, partly by the Wars with Ferdinando of Leon,
and sanctius of Navarre, who took several Places
from the Castilians. But coming to his riper years,
he did extricate himself, though not without great
difficulty, out of those Troubles. In the War against
the Moors, who always kept the spanish Kings in Exercise,
he suffered extreamly, so that he was obliged
to make a Truce with them, because the Kings of
Navarre and Leon at the same time fell upon him. 
At last there was a Confederacy made betwixt these
Kings, with a certain agreement, how such Places
should be disposed of as should be taken from the
Moors. In the Year 1210, a most Memorable Expedition
was undertaken against the Moors, where presented
themselves a great many Foreigners, who came
to signalize themselves; but a great many of them
being soon tired out, returned home. At that time
was fought the famous Battle of Lasa, where 200000
Moors being slain, they lost all their strength. In
this Battle sanctius King of Navarre, breaking first
through a Chain which surrounded the Moorish Army,
he afterwards bore a Chain with an Emerald in his
shield. In this War was taken from the Moors, besides
other Places, the City of Calatrava. The King
of Leon took Alcantara. Alfonso died in the Year 1214,
leaving behind him his son Henry,
         Henry. whose Minority occasioned
great disturbances in the Kingdom; he died
without Issue in the Year 1217. He had two sisters,
the Eldest Blanch was Married to Lewis VIII. son of
Philip Augustus, King of France: The second, Berengaria,
was Married to Alfonso, King of Leon. The
Crown, by Right of succession, did belong to the Eldest,
and her Heirs: But out of a hatred the states
bore to strangers, they conferred the Kingdom upon
Ferdinand,
         Ferdinandus sanctus. sir-named the Holy, son of Berengaria, who

with all speed imaginable, possessed himself of it, before
he could be prevented by his Father, surmounting
all the difficulties which were raised against him,
partly by his Father, partly by some of the Nobility. 
It is related by some, That Blanch was not the eldest
sister, but that some of the Castilian Noblemen did
dispute the right of Berengaria to the Crown, because
the Pope had declared her marriage with Alfonso void,
and their Children illegitimate, as being too near in
Bloud. 1230. By the death of Alfonso, Leon and Castile
were reunited under Ferdinand, at what time the
Moors suffered extreamly in their Affairs. 1230. King James
of Arragon took from them Majorca, in the Year
1232. Minorca in the Year 1234. Yvica in the
Year 1238. The City and Kingdom of Valencia. 
Ferdinand took from them, besides other places, in
the Year 1230, Merida and Badajoz. In the Year
1236,1240. the City and Kingdom of Corduba: Murcia
surrendered it self to the protection of Castile. In
the Year 1243,1248. 
         Jaen, sevile, and the greatest part
of Andalusia. But whilst he was making Preparations
to carry the War into Africa, he died in the
Year 1252. §. 7. Alfonso X. The History of the next following Years is
full of Troubles and Divisions. Alfonso, 'tis true,
was famous in foreign Countries for his Wisdom and
great skill in Astronomy, so that it is reported of him,
that he used to say, That if God would have advised
with him at the time of the Creation of the World, the
World should have been made more uniform; yet he
was unfortunate at home, and hated by his subjects. 
The first occasion of which was, that he being desirous
to fill his Treasury, which was exhausted, he caused
the current Coin to be diminished, which enhanced the
price of every thing, and whilst to prevent this, he
set certain rates on all Commodities,1256. which occasioned
a general scarcity of all things, the people not being
willing to sell at his rates. He was by some of the Electors
chosen Roman Emperour, but because his Children
were then very young, and great Divisions arose
among his Nobles, he delaied for a great many Years

to go thither, and to receive the Imperial Crown, till
in the Year 1275, a fancy took him all on a sudden,
to go and take possession of the Empire, though Rudolf
of Habsburgh was already got into the Imperial
Throne. But his Journey was ended in Provence, he
returning from thence home by the persuasion of the
Pope, who afterwards excommunicated him, and obliged
him also to renounce the Title of Emperour. 
After the death of Ferdinand, his eldest son, sanctius,
the younger Brother, did aim at the succession, tho
Ferdinand had left Children behind him. This raised
a Jealousie betwixt the Father and son, who rose in
open Rebellion against his Father, being assisted by
the major part of the states, which Commotion however
ceased with the death of Alfonso. 
         1284. Under the
Reign of this King many Battels were fought against
the Moors with various success. sanctius V. In the Year also 1282
happened the sicilian Vespers,The sicilian Vespers. by which means Peter
King of Arragon obtained the Kingdom of sicily, he
having before a pretence to it, as having married Constantia
the Daughter of Manfred. Against this sanctius
the son of Ferdinand, his elder Brother, raised several
disturbances, which he overcame all by his Wisdom:
he dyed in the Year 1295. During the time of
the Minority of his son Ferdinand IV. Ferdinand IV the Kingdom
of Castile was overwhelmed with trouble. After he
came to Age, he undertook an Expedition against the
Moors, taking from them Gibraltar, and died in the
flower of his Age. 1312. Under the Reign of this King
James King of Arragon was presented with the Kingdom
of sardinia,
         1297. by the Pope, who pretended to have
a right of disposing of it; and those of Pisa being
then in possession of the same, were afterwards beaten
out by the Arragonians. The Minority also of Alfonso
XI. Alfonso XI. was full of troubles. At that time the Moors
had again received a great Reinforcement out of Africa,
         1324. 
the Castilians nevertheless obtained a most signal
Victory over them in the Year 1340, in which Battel,
'tis said 200000 were slain on the side of the Moors,
and but only 25000 spaniards. At that time Alzira
was taken, and a Peace concluded with the King of
Granada, under condition that he should be tributary

to Castile. 
         1350. This King died in the siege of Gibraltar,
which he had lost before. His son Pieter, sirnamed
The Cruel,
         Peter the Cruel. reigned very tyrannically. He
drew the hatred of most of his subjects upon himself
by parting from his Queen Blanch, whom he afterwards,
tho Innocent, for the sake of a Concubine,
caused to be murthered. This occasioned a Plot against
him, which he suppressed with a great deal of
Bloudshed. In the mean while a War arose betwixt
him and Pieter IV. King of Arragon, who assisted the
Rebels in Castile, who had set up for their King, Henry
the King's Brother, begotten on a Concubine called
Eleonora Gusman: With him also joined a great many
French Voluntiers; so that falling upon Pieter of
Castile,
         1366. he forced him to flee into Aquitain. But he
having raised there a considerable Army, returned into
spain, defeated Henry, and obliged him to flee into
France, but did not desist from his Tyranny,
whereby he quite lost the Affection of his subjects:
And Henry having gathered another Army in France
returned into Castile; where being assisted by the Castilians
he vanquished Pieter, and in the flight killed
him with his own Hands. 1369. 
        §. 8. Henry II. Out of the Race of this Henry II. sirnamed
The Bastard, sprang afterwards Princes who proved
very mischievous to spain. Henry himself did at first
labour under great difficulties, the neighbouring Nations
attacking him every where, yet he surmounted
them, and at last made Peace with them all. But
the Favour of his Nobles he bought with Money. He
died in the year 1379. John II. His son John endeavoured to
obtain the Crown of Portugal, of Ferdinand its King,
whose Daughter he had married. But the Portugueses,
out of a hatred against the Castilians, set up
for their King, John natural son to Pieter King of
Portugal, who maintained himself against the Castilians,
routing them near to Aliunbaret; which Victory
the Portugueses mightily boast of in their Histories. 
Castile was at that time in great danger, the English
siding with the Portugueses, under the Duke of Lancaster,
who having married Constantia, the Daughter

of Pieter sirnamed The Cruel, pretended to the right
of that Crown, bearing also the Title and Arms:
But the business was at last composed, by marrying
the Daughter of the English Duke to the Prince of
Castile; after which also a Peace was concluded with
Portugal. 
         1390. 
         John died by a fall from his Horse. His
son Henry III. Henry III. was a sickly Prince, under whose Minority
great Divisions arose in the Kingdom. During
the time of his Reign he did nothing remarkable, except
that he restored the Revenues which the Nobles
had alienated from the Crown. He died in the
Year 1407,John II. leaving behind him John II. a Child of
two Months old. The tuition of this Prince was, besides
his Mother, committed to Ferdinand his Uncle,
to whom the states did offer the Kingdom, which he
generously refusing to accept of, he obtained afterwards
the Crown of Arragon. This King being under
the tuition of his Mother grown very Effeminate,
only addicted to Voluptuousness, having no Genius
nor inclination for publick Business, committed the
whole management to his Favourite Alvarez de Luna,
an ambitious Man, which occasioned great Jealousies
in his Nobles against him. This King taking his
Favourite's part against the Nobility, an open War ensued
betwixt them, the Rebels being headed by his
own son, and the City of Toledo declared against the
King. At last the King being tired with the many Inconveniencies,
cut this Favourite's Head off;145•. but died
himself in the Year next following. Under the Reign
of this King a War broke out betwixt the spaniards
and those of Granada, wherein the first signalized
themselves to their advantage. In the Year 1420
King Alfonso of Arragon was adopted by Joan Queen
of Naples; but a difference arising betwixt Joan and
Alfonso, she declared the said Adoption void and null,
receiving in his stead Lewis Duke of Anjou; which
afterwards occasioned bloody Wars betwixt France
and spain: Yet Alfonso at last kept the upper hand,
making himself Master of Naples,
         1442. and leaving the
same to his natural son Ferdinand. In the Kingdom
of Castile succeeded John his son Henry IV. Henry IV. the scandal
to the spanish Nation. He being incapable of begetting

Children, to take away this suspicion, hired
one Bertrand Corva, who for this service was made
Earl of Ledesma, to lie with the Queen, who having
brought forth a Daughter called Joan, Henry caused
her to be proclaimed Heiress to the Crown. What
confirmed this the more was, that the Queen afterwards
had another Bastard begotten by another person. 
To remove this shame, and to exclude Joan
from the succession of the Crown, the Nobles of spain
entered into an Association; and putting the Image of
Henry upon a scaffold, they there formally accused
him, and afterwards, having taken off his Ornaments,
threw it from the scaffold, at the same time proclaiming
Alfonso, Brother of Henry, their King. From
hence arose most pernicious intestine Wars which ended
in bloudy Battels. During these troubles Alfonso
died: About the same time,1468. 
         Ferdinand son of John II. 
King of Arragon, whom his Father had declared King
of sicily, propsed a Marriage with Isabella, Henry's
sister, to whom the rebellious Castilians had offered
the Crown, and forced Henry to confirm the right of
Isabella to the Crown; whereupon the Nuptials were
celebrated,1469. but privately: Yet would Henry, by making
this Concession void, have afterwards set up again
the Title of Joan, whom he had promised in
marriage to Charles Duke of Aquitain, Brother to
Lewis XI. King of France; but he dying suddenly,
Henry at last was reconciled to Ferdinand and Isabella,
and died in the Year 1472. §. 9. Ferdinand the Catholick and Isabella. The Kingdom of Castile and Arragon united. From this match of Ferdinand (whom the
Castilians call The V. or The Catholick) with Isabella,
sprang the great Fortune and Power of spain, it under
his Reign arriving to that pitch of Greatness,
which ever since has made it both the Terrour and the
Envy of Europe. This Ferdinand also met with some
obstacles at the beginning of his Reign, the states of
Castile having limited his Power within too narrow
Bounds: And Joan, the late King Henry's supposed
Daughter, having contracted a match with Alfonso
King of Portugal, who entring Castile with a puissant
Army, caused her to be proclaimed Queen; but the

         Portugueses being soundly beaten, the whole design
vanished, and Joan retiring into a Monastery, the civil
Commotions were totally suppressed. The next care
of Ferdinand was to regulate such Disorders as were
crept into the Government in the former Reigns;
wherefore he caused that Law-book to be compiled,
which from the City of Toro, where it first was published,
is called Leges Tauri. In the Year also 1478,
the famous spanish Inquisition was first instituted by
him against the Moors and Jews,
         The first beginning of the spanish Inquisition. who having once
professed themselves Christians, did afterwards return
to their Idolatry and superstitious Worship. This
Court of Inquisition is esteemed an inhuman and execrable
Tribunal among other Nations, and carries
the greatest Injustice with it, in ordering the Children
to bear the Guilt of their Parents, nor permitting any
body to know his Accusers to clear himself against
them: But the spaniards ascribe to this Inquisition,
the benefit which they enjoy of one Religion, the variety
of which has brought great Inconveniencies upon
other states: 'Tis true, by those means you may
make Hypocrites, not sincere Christians. After he
had ordered his Affairs at home,1497. and after the death of
his Father, taken upon him the Government of Arragon,
he undertook an Expedition against the Moors
of Granada,
         1481. which lasted ten Years, wherein the spaniards
were routed near Mallaga,
         1483. but quickly revenged
themselves upon their Enemies, taking from
them one place after another, till they at last besieged
the City of Granada with 50000 Foot and 12000
Horse,Granada taken. 
          and having forced the King Boabdiles to a surrender,
they put an end to the Kingdom of the Moors
in spain,
         1492. after it had stood there for above 700 Years:
And to prevent the possibility of their ever encreasing
again in spain, he banished 170000 Families of Jews
and Moors out of spain, by which means, the Kingdom
nevertheless was despoiled of vast Riches, and of
a great number of Inhabitants. After this he took
from them Mazalquivir, Oran, Pennon de Velez and
Mellilla, situated upon the Coast of Barbary. Ferdinand
also made use of this opportunity to teach his
Nobles, who were grown overpowerfull, their due

Respect and Obedience to the King, and took upon
himself the sovereign Disposal of all the spanish Orders
of Knighthood, which were grown to that excess
of Riches and Power in spain, that they were
formidable to its Kings. Much about the same time
Christopher Columbus,
         1494. 
         a Genouese, discovered America,
after his Offers had been refused by the Kings of Portugal
and England;
         America discovered. 
          and after he had been seven
Years solliciting at the Court of Castile for a supply to
undertake the Voyage: At last 17000 Ducats were
employed in equipping three Vessels, out of which
stock such prodigious Conquests and Riches have accrued
to spain, that ever since it has aimed at the Universal
Monarchy of Europe. How easily the spaniards
did conquer these vast Countries, and with
what Barbarity they used the Inhabitants, is too long
to be related here. Not long after a War was kindled
betwixt spain and France, which has been the occasion
of inspeakable Miseries in Europe; after these two
Warlike Nations were freed from that Evil which had
hitherto diverted them from medling with Foreign
Affairs, the French having rid themselves from the
English, and the spaniards from the Moors. For,
when Charles VIII. The first rise of the War betwixt France and spain. 
          King of France, undertook an
Expedition against the Kingdom of Naples, Ferdinand
did not judge it for his Interest, to let the
French, by conquering this Kingdom, to become
Masters of Italy; especially, since by marrying his
Daughters he was in aliance with England, Portugal
and the Netherlands, and besides the then kings of
Naples descended from the House of Arragon: And
tho France lately entered with him into a Confederacy,
by vertue of which the French gave up Roussilion to
spain, hoping thereby to bring over Ferdinand to
their Party; nevertheless, when he perceived, That by
all his Intercessions he could not disswade him from
undertaking of this Expedition, he entered into a
Confederacy with the Pope, Emperour, Venice and
Milan against France. He also sent to the assistance
of the Neapolitans, Gonsalvus Ferdinand de C•rdua,
afterwards sirnamed The Grand Captain, under whose
Conduct the French were beaten out of the Neapolitan
         
Territories, whilst he himself made an inrode into
Languedock. In the Year 1500 the Moors living in
the Mountains near Granada rebelled, and were not
without great difficulty appeased. Afterwards an Agreement
was made betwixt Ferdinand and Lewis XII. 
King of France, concerning the Kingdom of Naples,
under pretence, to make War from thence against the
Turks; which being soon conquered by their joint
Power, they divided it according to their Agreement. 
But because each of them would have had this delicious
Morsel for himself, they fell at variance concerning
the Limits and some other matters which intervened
betwixt two Nations that had an animosity against
one another: Wherefore they came quickly to
Blows, and Gonsalvus routed the French near Ceriniola,
took the City of Naples, beat them again near
the River Liris or Garigliano, and taking Cajeta,
drove the French a second time out of the Kingdom
of Naples: But Gonsalvus was not rewarded by Ferdinand
according to his Deserts, for he not only lesiened
his Authority at Naples, but also being suspicious, that
he either intended to keep that Kingdom for Philip,
son-in-law to Ferdinand, or else for himself, Ferdinand
undertook a Journey in Person to Naples, on
purpose to bring Gonsalvus handsomly away from
thence; and taking him along with him into spain,
he treated him ill for his great deserts: In the mean
time died the Queen Isabella,
         1504. which occasioned some
Differences betwixt Ferdinand and his son-in-law Philip
the Netherlander,
         Philip. 
         Ferdinand pretending, according
to the last Will of Isabella, to take upon him the Administration
of Castile. And to maintain his Claim
the better, he entered into a Confederacy with France,
by marrying Germana de Foix, sister to Lewis XII. 
hoping thereby to obtain a powerfull Assistance, in
case Philip should come to attack him: But Philip
coming into spain, and taking upon him the Administration
of the Government in the name of his
Lady Joan,
         1506. 
         Ferdinand retired into Arragon. But Philip
died soon after, whose Queen Joan being not in
her right Wits, yet undertook the Administration of
the Government, not without the opposition of some

of the chief of the Nobility; wherefore, the Administration
of the Government was by common consent
committed to Ferdinand after his return from
Naples, notwithstanding the Emperour Maximilian
did pretend to it, in the right of his Grandson Charles. 
In the Year 1508 Ferdinand entered into a Confederacy
against the Venetians, whereby he regained the
Cities of Calabria, Brindisi, Otranto, Trano, Mola and
Polignano, which the Venetians had formerly obtained
for some services done to the Neapolitans. But as
soon as Ferdinand perceived that the Venetians were
like to be swallowed up by the Emperour and France,
the Pope and he left the Confederacy, thinking it
more convenient to preserve the state of Venice; since
by adding the Territories of Venice to those of Milan,
which were then possessed by the French, they would
have grown too powerfull in Italy. Hence arose a
War, in which John d' Albert, King of Navarre, taking
part with the French, was upon instigation of
Ferdinand excommunicated by the Pope; under
which pretext Ferdinand took an opportunity to possess
himself of that part of the Kingdom,1512. which lies
on the spanish side of the Pyrenean Mountains; which
since that time the French have in vain indeavoured to
recover. Ferdinand conquered Na
           ••arre. In the Year 1510 the spaniards took Bugia
and Tripolis upon the Coast of Barbary; but were
routed in the Island of Gerbis. This wise King died
in the Year 1516. §. 10. Him succeeded his Grandson by his Daughter,
Charles,
         Charles. the fifth Emperour of that Name, who,
with the assistance of the Cardinal Ximenes, immediately
took upon himself the Administration of the
Government, his Mother, to whom the same did belong,
being incapable of Administring it. This Prince,
who, since Charles the Great, was the most Potent
Prince that hath been in Europe, spent the greatest
part of his Life in Travels and Wars. In the very
beginning of his Reign, there were some Commotions
in spain, which were soon appeased. John D' Albert
also made an Inrode into the Kingdom of Navarre,
in hopes to recover it, but was quickly repulsed. 

But with the French, during his whole Life, he
waged continual Wars. For, though in the Year 1516,
he made a League with King Francis I. whereby the
Daughter of Francis was promised to him in Marriage;
yet was this Tie not strong enough to withhold
the Animosity of these two courageous Princes. 
Charles, who was flushed up with the great success of
his House, had always in his Mind his Motto, Plus ultra. 
But Francis, who was surrounded every-where
by so potent a Prince, did oppose his Designs with all
his Might, fearing, lest his Power should grow too
strong both for him and all the rest of Europe. Charles
obtained a most particular advantage. 1519. When the Imperial
Dignity was conferred upon him; to obtain
which for himself, or some-body else, Francis had laboured
with all his Might,Wars betwixt Charles and France. 
          but in vain. Robert de
Mare, Lord of sedan, withdrawing himself from the
Emperour, and putting himself under the Protection
of France, with whose assistance he attacked the Lord
of Emmerick, who was under the Emperour's protection,
administered new matter of jealsousie, which
quickly broke out into an open flame in the Netherlands. 
In which War the French lost Tournay and
st. Amant, but beat the Imperialists from before Meziores. 
Charles also did intend to drive the French
out of Milan upon instigation of Pope Leo X. Charles
pretending that Francis had neglected to receive this
Dutchy in fief of the Empire, beat the French near Bicoque. 
Fonterabie also, which they had taken by surprize,
was re-taken by force from the French. It proved
also very disadvantageous to them, that the Constable
Charles of Bourbon, sided with the Emperour;
and entring Provence,
         1524. besieged Marseilles; Which nevertheless
he was forced to quit, as soon as Francis
marched with all his Forces that way into Italy to
recover the Milaneze. Where he took the City of
Milan, but at the siege of Pavia was Attacked by the
Imperial Generals, who totally routed his Army; and
having taken him Prisoner,1525. carried him into spain. 
The King himself was in part the occasion of this loss,
he having sent a great part of his Army towards Naples
and savona; and those that remained with him,

were most Italians, swiss and Grisons, who did not
perform their Duty in the Battle; and most of his
Generals were of opinion, to avoid the hazard of a
Battle, by retiring under the City of Milan. The
French also succeeded ill in the Diversion, which they
endeavoured to give the Emperour; for by the help of
Charles Duke of Geldres, and the Friselanders, for
they were at that time worsted by Charles's Forces. 
There were some that advised Charles, to set Francis
at liberty without any Ransome, and by this Act of
Generosity to oblige him for ever: But he followed
the Counsels of such as did advise to make advantage
of so great a Prisoner. He therefore imposed very
hard Conditions upon him, which Francis refusing to
accept of, out of discontent fell into a dangerous sickness,
so that Charles himself went to visit and comfort
him; Though he was advised to the contrary by
his Chancellour Gallinaca, who alledged that such a
Visit, where he did not intend to promise the Prisoner
his liberty, would rather seem to proceed from
Covetousness, and fear of losing the advantage of his
Ransome, than from any civility or good inclination
towards him. And this sickness was the real cause,
why at last the Treaty, concerning his Liberty, which
had been so long on foot, was finished, the Emperour
fearing that his Discontent might plunge him into
another sickness, or Death it self. In the mean
time, the prodigious success which attended the Emperour,
did raise no small jealousie among other Princes;
and by instigation of Pope Clement VII. three
Armies were raised to maintain the Liberty of Italy. 
To prevent this storm, and especially to withdraw the
Pope from the Confederacy, the Emperour's Generals
marched directly against Rome, which they took by
storm, (where Charles of Bourbon was slain,) and for
several days together plundered the City, and committed
great Out-rages. The Pope himself was besieged
in the Castle of st. Angelo; and Charles, at the
same time that the Pope was enclosed, his own Forces
caused Prayers to be made for 40 days together,Rome taken by Charles V. for
his deliverance; at last, forced by Famine, he was
forced to surrender, and to renounce the above-mentioned

League. 1527. The Conditions, on which Francis
had obtained his Liberty, were, That Francis should
surrender the Dukedom of Burgundy; to renounce
the sovereignty over Flanders and Artois; quit all his
pretences upon Naples and Milan; to marry the
Emperour's sister Eleonora, and to give his two sons
as Pledges for the performance of these Articles. But
as soon as he got into his own Kingdom he protested
against the Treaty, which was extorted from him
during his Imprisonment: And making a League with
the Pope, England, Venice, the suiss and Florence,
sent an Army into Italy under the Command of Odet
de Foix, Lord of Lautree. This occasioned not only
that very gross words passed betwixt these two Princes,
but they also gave one another the lye, and a Challenge
passed betwixt them: But Lautree, who had at first
great success, being destroied with his Army by sickness
in the siege of Naples,
         A Peace mad• at Cambray. 
          a Peace was at last concluded
at Cambray, in the Year 1529, by virtue of
which Francis paid for his sons 2550000 Rixdollars, renounced
his Pretensions to Flanders, Artois, Milan, and
Nalpes, and married Eleonora, sister to the Emperour;
out of which Marriage, if a son should be born, he was
to be put into the possession of the Dukedom of Burgundy. 
In the Year 1530, Charles was Crowned by
Pope Clement VIII. at Bononia, whereby he obtained
from the Emperour, that the commonwealth of Florence
should be made a Principality, and the said City
was by force obliged to admit this Change. Alexander
de Medicis being constituted Duke, to whom the
Emperour married his natural Daughter Margaret. In
the same Year the Bishop of Ʋtrecht resigned the soveraignty
of that City, and the Province of Over-yssel,
into the Hands of Charles, and the Provinces of Geldren,
Zutphen, Groningen; the Twente and Drente also
fell into his Hands. In the Year 1535, he went with
a puissant Army into Africa, took Tunis and Goletta,
restoring the Kingdom of Tunis to Muleassa, who was
banished before by Haradin Barbarossa, but in Goletta
he left a Garrison. In the Year 1537, another War
broke out betwixt Charles and Francis: For the latter
could not digest the loss of Milan; and being advised

by the Pope, that when-ever he intended to Attack
Milan, he should first make himself Master of savoy;
and Francis sforzia dying at the same time, he fell
upon Charles Duke of savoy; and under pretence, that
he defrauded his Mother of her Dowry, drove him
quite out of savoy, and conquered a great part of Piedmont. 
But the Emperour, who was resolved to annex
the Dutchy of Milan to his Family, came to the
assistance of the Duke of savoy, and at the Head of
his Army, entring Provence, took Aix, and some other
Places; but his Army being much weakned with sickness,
for want of Provisions, he was forced to retire
again. In the Netherlands, the Imperialists took
st. Paul and Monstrevil, Killing great Numbers of the
French. 
         1538. Through Mediation of the Pope, Paul III. a
Truce of 10 Years was concluded at Nissa in Provence;
after which these two Princes had a friendly Interview
at Aigues Mortes. And in the next following Year,
the Emperour, against the advice of his friends, ventured
to take his way through the very heart of
France, being desirous with all possible speed to compose
the Disorders, which were arisen at Ghent. Yet
had he before by the Connestable Anna Montmorancy,
cajolled Francis into a belief, that he would restore to
him the Dutchy of Milan, which however he never
intended to perform. In the Year 1541, he undertook
an Expedition against Algiers in Africa, at the latter
end of the Year, against the advice of the Pope and others
of his friends, who persuaded him to stay till
next spring. He there Landed his Army with good
success; but a few days after such prodigious storms
and Rains did fall, which dispersed his ships, and
spoiled the Fire-locks of the souldiers, that the Emperour
was obliged, with the loss of one half of his
Army,1542. to return into spain. In the Year next following,
Francis broke with him again, under pretence
that his Ambassadours Caesar Fregosus and Anthony
Rinco, which he had sent through the Milanese, by
the way of Venice, to go to the Ottoman Port, were
upon the River Po Murthered by Orders of the Governour
of Milan. Wherefore William Duke of Cleves
entring Brabant on one side, the Duke of Orleans on

the other side, took Luxemburgh and some other places. 
The Dauphin besieged Perpignan, but was obliged to
raise the siege: The famous Pirate Barbarossa, did by
the instigation of Francis, great mischief on the seacoasts
of Calabria, destroying Nissa in Provence by Fire. 
Charles seeing himself at once attacked in so many
places, setting aside the Differences which were arisen
about the Divorce betwixt Henry and his Aunt Catherine,
made a League with Henry King of England,
wherein it was agreed, That the Emperour should
force his way through Champaigne, whilst Henry entered
into Picardy, that so they might, by joining their
Forces, ruine the whole Power of France. The Emperour
therefore, with an Army of 50000 men, beat
the Duke of Cleves in the Netherlands, forcing him
to surrender Guelderland; and after having recovered
the places in Luxemburgh, taken before by the French▪
         
entered into Campaigne, taking by force Lygny and
Disier: Francis kept with his Army on the other side
of the River Marne, and not daring to fight the Imperialists,
contented himself to ravage the Country
which they were to march through, to endeavour to cut
off their Provisions: Nevertheless the Imperial Army
found a sufficient quantity at Espernay and Chasteau
Thierry. This occasioned such a Terrour and Confusion
in Paris, that the Citizens were for leaving the City,
if the King, by his Presence, had not encouraged
them to stay. And if, on the other side, King Henry
had acted according to the Agreement, they might
easily have got the French Army betwixt them, and
in all likelyhood, would have put a period to the
French Greatness. But Henry being detained at the
sieges of Bologne and Monstrevil, sent word to the
Emperour, That he would not stir further, till he had
made himself Master of these two places. Charles
then began to suspect the King of England, whom he
perceived meerly to be for his own Interest, and did not
think fit to trust any longer; considering also with
himself what vast charges he was at in this War, and
how thereby his Designs were retarded which he had
projected against the Protestants in Germany; as also,
that his Forces had received a considerable overthrow

in Italy, near Carizola, from the French, he made
thereupon a Peace with Francis at Crespy in the County
of Valois. 
         Peace made at Crespy. 
          Then Charles undertook to subdue the
Protestants,1544. entring, for that purpose, into a League
with Pope Paul III. Charles wages War against the Protestants in Germany. 
          which War he carried on with
such success, that without great trouble he overthrew
them, making their chief Heads, the Elector
of saxony and Landtgrave of Hesse,
         1547. Prisoners: The
Emperour made use of this Policy, in fomenting Divisions
betwixt Duke Maurice and his Cousin, the
Elector of saxony; and refusing to fight with them
at first, he thereby protracted the War, foreseeing,
that a Confederacy under so many Heads would not
last long, and that the Cities, which contributed the
most towards it, would grow quickly weary of the
Charges of the War. Francis also, and Henry VIII. 
were both of them lately dead, who else, questionless,
with all their Power, would have opposed his designs
of oppressing the Protestants, thereby to make himself
absolute Master in Germany. The Heads also of
the Protestant League did greatly contribute to their
own Misfortune, they having let slip several opportunities,
especially, at first, before the Emperour had rightly
settled his Matters, when they might have done
him considerable mischief; nevertheless Charles was no
great gainer by these Victories, because he used the
Conquered, whom he was not able to keep in Obedience
by force, with too much rigour, keeping the
Captive Princes in too close an Imprisonment. He also
disobliged Maurice Elector of saxony, after his Father-in-law
the Landtgrave of Hesse, had by his persuasions
surrendered himself to the Emperour. The Elector
therefore being persuaded by the Prayers of his
Children and others, who objected to him, That by
his Assistance their Religion and Liberty were in danger
of being lost, he fell unawares upon Charles,
whom,1550. under favour of the Night and a Fogg, he
forced to retire from Inspruck. After this exploit a
Peace was concluded by the Mediation of King Ferdinand,
where,Treaty at Passaw. 
          in the Treaty at Passaw, the Protestant
Religion was established. In the mean while
Henry II. King of France, coming to the assistance of

the Protestants, had taken Metz, Toul and Verdun,
The Emperour attackt Metz again with great fury,
but having been fain to leave it after a considerable
loss sustained, he discharged his Fury upon Hesdin and
Tervanne, which he levelled with the Ground. In Italy
the Imperialists took siena,
         1554. which afterwards Philip
II. gave to Cosmus Duke of Tuscany, reserving to
himself the sovereignty and some sea-ports. At last,
Charles tired with the Toils of the Empire, and the
Infirmities of his Body, resigned the Imperial Crown to
his Brother Ferdinand, who would not consent that the
same should come to his son Philip. But to Philip he
gave all his Kingdoms and Territories, except those in
Germany (which fell to Ferdinand's share) reserving
to himself only a yearly allowance of 100000 Ducats. Abdication of Charles. 
         
He had made a little before, a Truce of five Years with
France, which was soon broke by the persuasions of
the Pope, who endeavouring to drive the Family of
Colonna out of their Possessions; and they being upheld
by the spaniards, the French sided with the Pope. 
But this War proved very unfortunate to the French,
they being routed at st. Quintins, lost that City, and
the Mareschal de Thermes was also soundly beaten near
Gravelin. 
         Peace betwixt spain and France, 1559. At last a Peace was again concluded at
Chateau en Chambrasis, by virtue of which, the
French were obliged to restore all what they had taken
in Italy, which had been the occasion of some
Blood-shed by Francis and Henry. But under-hand
it was agreed, That both the King of spain and
France should endeavour to root out the Hereticks
(as they called them) which succeeded afterwards very
ill both in spain and France. In the Year before this,
viz. 
         Charles dies. 
          1558, died Charles in the Convent of st. Justus
in spain, where he spent his last days in quiet. His
last Will and Testament (tho never so rational) was
so far from being pleasing to the Inquisition, that it
wanted but little of having been burnt as Heretical. 
But his Father Confessour and the rest of the Monks
in that Convent, who had been present, were forced
to undergo the severe Judgment of this Court. 
§. 11. Philip II. Under the Reign of Philip II. the greatness
of the spanish Monarchy began to be at a stand; neither
had its Kings the same success, as formerly, to
get vast Kingdoms by Marriages. For from the match
of Philip with Mary Queen of England, came no
Children. And truly, in my Opinion, the spanish
Greatness received the first shock at that time, when
Charles V. surrendered his Dominions in Germany to
his Brother Ferdinand, and afterwards had him elected
King of the Romans; by which means the Power
of this House was divided, and the Imperial Crown
separated from the spanish Monarchy. Charles would
fain have afterwards persuaded Ferdinand to transfer
the succession of the Imperial Crown upon Philip;
but he being persuaded by his son Maximilian to
keep what he had got, would in no ways part with it. 
He was also much beloved by the Germans, whereas
they had an aversion against Philip; who being a
meer spaniard, did not as much as understand the
German Tongue: And Ferdinand and his successours
proved very good Princes, who were not fond of the
spanish methods of Governing. But that which gave
the greatest shock to the spanish Greatness, were the
Troubles arisen in the Netherlands. The reason why
this Evil grew incurable, was, because Philip being over
fond of his ease, would rather sit still in spain, than by
his Presence endeavour to stop the current before it ran
too violent, tho' his Father did not think it too much,
to venture himself at the Discretion of Francis his
Rival, to appease the Tumults arisen only in the City
of Ghent. Another reason was, That he took the
most violent course, by sending the Duke of Alva, a
cruel Man, among the Netherlunders, who being used
to a mild sort of Government, were thereby put into
despair; especially when they were informed, That
the Inquisition had declared Criminal, not only those
who were guilty of the Rebellion, and pulling down
the Images, but also all such Catholicks as had not
made resistance against them. The saying of Anthony
Vargas, a spanish Minister, is a famous as ridiculous;
Haeretici diruerunt templa, boni nihil fecerunt
contra, ergo omnes debent patibulari; i. e. The Hereticks

demolished the Churches, the Catholicks did not
oppose them, wherefore they ought all to be hanged. Besides
this, the spaniards were much hated by the Netherlanders,
not only because of the great differences
there was betwixt the Manners of these Nations, but
also, because these latter had been in great esteem with
Charles V. who was very like them in all his Behaviour:
On the contrary, Philip only encouraged the
spaniards, who having an extraordinary conceit of
their own Abilities, and taking the Netherlanders for
Cowards, did not think they had Courage enough
to oppose their Designs. The spaniards also were well
pleased to see the Netherlanders to begin first, hoping
the King would thereby take an opportunity to clip
their Privileges, and by making them all alike obtain
an absolute Dominion over them: This done, they
hoped to make these Countries their Armory and
store-house, from whence they might with more ease
invade France and England, and raise the spanish Monarchy
to the highest degree of Greatness. But the
Netherlanders, on the other side, were resolved not to
part with their Liberty, nor to be treated as a conquered
Nation. And when Philip, at his departure,
would leave spanish Garrisons in the Netherlands, and
to soften the matter, constituted the Prince of Orange
and Earl of Egmont, Generals over them, yet could
they not be persuaded to accept of the same, alledging,
That the Netherlanders had got but very small
Advantages by the Peace with France, which they
had procured by their own Valour, if they now should
be in danger of being subdued themselves by a foreign
Power. The neighbouring Princes also, but especially
Elizabeth, Queen of England, took an opportunity by
these troubles to empty the vast Treasures of spain,
and to exhaust its strength. The Protestant Princes
also of Germany, who hated the spaniards, were glad
of this opportunity, and assisted the Prince of Orange
upon all occasions. And the Emperours thought it
more convenient to be at quiet and to please the Germans,
than to be too forward to assist their Cousins. 
These Commotions in the Netherlands did also occasion
the War betwixt Philip and Elizabeth,
         War with England. Queen of

         England, she not only affording assistance to the Netherlanders,
but also the English Privateers doing considerable
mischief to the spanish West-India ships; and
the famous Francis Drake plundered the very southern
Coast of America. On the other side, Philip,
by supporting the Rebels in Ireland, proved very
troublesome to Queen Elizabeth. At last Philip did
resolve with one stroke to put down the whole
strength of England; to which purpose he was equipping
a great Fleet for several Years together, which he
called The Invincible, the like never had been seen before
those times. The Fleet consisted of 150 sail of
ships, which carried 1600 great pieces of Brass Cannon,
and 1050 of Iron; 8000 seamen, 20000 souldiers,
besides Volunteers; the Charge amounted daily to
30000 Ducats, but the whole Preparations to twelve
Milions of Ducats. The Pope sixtus V. also excommunicated
Queen Elizabeth, assigning her Kingdom
to Philip. But all these Preparations came to nothing,
the greatest part of this Fleet being destroied,The spanish Armado destroyed. 
partly by the English and Dutch, partly by Tempests,
few returned home, and that in a most miserable condition,
so that there was scarce a Noble Family in
spain but went into Mourning for the loss of some
Friend or another. But the evenness of Temper is
much to be admired in Philip, who received this bad
news without the least alteration, giving only this
Answer, I did not send them out to fight against the
Winds and seas. 
         1588. Afterwards the English and Dutch
Fleets being joined, beat the spanish Fleet near Cadiz,
taking from the spaniards, not only a great many
ships richly laden, but also the City of Cadiz it self;
which nevertheless was again left by the English General,1596. 
the Earl of Essex, after he had plundered it,
to the great dishonour of the English, who might
from thence have done a great deal of mischief to the
spaniards. Neither did spain get any advantage by
having entangled it self in the Troubles, and (as it
was called) the holy League, made in France. Philip,
'tis true, proposed to himself to have met with a fair
opportunity, by excluding the Bourbon Family to annex
the Crown of France to his House, or by raising

Divisions in this Kingdom to swallow up one piece or
another, or to assist one of his Creatures in obtaining
that Crown; or, at least, by dividing it into so many
Factions, so to weaken its strength, as that it should
not be able to recover it self for a considerable time. 
But by the Courage and good Fortune of Henry IV. 
all these Measures were broke, and he declaring himself
a Catholick, took away the Foundation whereupon
the League was built. Thus Philip lost his vast
Expences; and besides this, suffered extreamly in his
Affairs; for in the mean time that he sent the Duke of
Parma, Governour of the Netherlands, to the assistance
of the League in France, the Confederate Netherlanders
had leisure given them to put themselves
and their Affairs into a good posture: Philip acted in
this business according to the old proverb; That he
who hunts two Hares at once, commonly catches neither
of them: Besides, Henry IV. after he had restored his
Affairs in France,
         1594. declared War against Philip; which
was nevertheless carried on in the Netherlands with
various success, the Count de Fuentes taking Cambray
in the Year 1595, and in the Year next following, the
Archduke Albert, Calais. On the other side, Henry
recovered Fere from the spaniards. In the Year 1597,
the spaniards took Amiens by surprise, which Henry
recovered not without great difficulty. At last, a
Peace was concluded in the same Year betwixt France
and spain at Vervin,
         Peace made at Vervin. 
          because Philip was unwilling to
leave his son, who was but young, entangled in a
War with so great a Captain as Henry was; and Henry
was sensible, that the Kingdom of France being enervated
did greatly want a Peace. Philip also waged several
Wars against the Turks; for the Pyrate Dragutes
had taken from the spaniards Tripoli,
         1551. after they had
been in possession of it for forty Years. To retake this,
Philip sent a strong Army,1560. which took the Isle of Gerbis;
but being afterwards beaten by the Turkish Fleet, he
lost, together with the Island, 18000 Men and 42 ships. 
In the Year 1564 Philip retook Pegnon de Velez. In the
Year 1566 Maltha was besieged by the Turks during
the space of four Months, which was relieved by Philip,
he forcing the Turks to raise the siege with great loss. 

In the Year 1571 the Confederate Fleet of spain,
Venice, and other Italian states, under the Command
of Don John of Austria, did obtain a most signal Victory
over the Turkish Fleet near Lepanto, whereby
the Turkish Naval strength was weakened to that degree,
that they were never afterwards so formidable in
those seas, as they were before: But else the spaniards
had got no great Reputation in this War; for by their
delays that considerable Island of Rhodes was lost before. 
In the Year 1573 Don John of Austria passed with an
Army into Africa, to retake Tunis, which succeeded
so well, that he forced the City, and added a new Fortification
to it: But in the Year next following, the Turks
sent a puissant Army thither, and retook the City, its
Fortifications being not quite perfected, as also Goletta,
which being not very well provided with all Necessaries,
was lost by the unskilfulness and Cowardice of the Governour;
so that the whole Kingdom of Tunis, to the
great prejudice of the Christians, fell into the Hands
of the Turks. At home Philip had a War with the
Marans of Granada, who rebelling against him, were
supported by the Algerines, and could not be subdued
but with great difficulty; and if the Turks had been
quick enough in giving them timely assistance, it
might have proved very dangerous to spain. This
Rebellion did not end till the Year 1570, after it had
continued for three years. 1592. There were also some Commotions
among the Arragonians; who pretended to
take part with Anthony Perez, who standing upon his
privilege against the Process that was made him for
having upon the King's Orders, murthered Escovedo,
an intimate Friend of Don John of Austria. Philip,
by this intended to purge himself of the Infamy of the
fact, and at once to revenge himself upon Perez,
who had been unfaithfull to him in some Love Intrigue,
aiming at that himself which he had undertaken
to procure for the King. And tho this did not
much redound to the honour of Philip, yet by this he
took an opportunity to retrench the Privileges of the
Arragonians. In the Year 1568, Philip caused his son
Charles to be killed, under pretence that he had endeavoured
to kill his Father; and not long after, the

Queen Isabella also, Charles's step-mother, died, not
without suspicion of having been poisoned. But a
great many are of opinion, that some Love Intrigues
were the occasion of their death, which is the more
probable, because the said Isabella being intended for
the Bride of Charles, had been taken by the Father
in spite of his son. Portugal falls to spain. 
         Henry King of Portugal dying,
there were several pretenders to that Crown, among
whom was Philip,
         1579. as being born of Isabella, Emanuel
King of Portugal's Daughter, who maintained his
Right by the sword; and under the Conduct of the
Duke of Alva conquered the Kingdom, forcing Anthony,
the Bastard, who had caused himself to be proclaimed
King, to fly into England, and from thence
into France,
         1595. where he died an Exile in Paris: Only
the Island of Tercera held out for some time longer,
which the French intending to relieve, were totally
routed by the spaniards. And thus Philip became
Master, both of the East and West Indies, the two
greatest Mines of Riches in the World. Nevertheless,
the French, English and Hollanders had found out a
way to ease him of these prodigious Revenues. For
Philip, just before his death, did confess, That the
War with the Netherlands only, had cost him 564
Millions of Ducats. And truly, it is very probable,
that trusting to his vast Riches he was thereby
prompted to his ambitious Designs, and to undertake
more than proved beneficial to him. He died
in the Year 1598. §. 12. Philip III. 
         Philip the IIId's Father had left him the
Kingdom in Peace with France, but the Dutch War
grew every day the heavier upon the spaniards. The
spaniards did hope, that after Philip II. in his latter
days had married his Daughter Clara Eugenia to Albert
Archduke of Austria, giving her the Netherlands
for a Dowry, the Dutch would become more pliable,
and reunite themselves with the rest of the Provinces
in the Netherlands, as having now a Prince of their
own, and not liable to the spanish Government. But
because the Hollanders did by no means like this bait,
and at the siege of Ostend gave a tast to the spaniards,
         
both of their strength and firm Resolution, that
they were resolved to stand it out with them, the spaniards
resolved to make Peace with them; especially
since the Hollanders had found out the way to the
East Indies, where they made great progress; France
also enjoying a peaceable Government under Henry IV. 
and encreasing in Power, it was feared, That if the
French should fall upon spain with fresh Forces,
which had been tired out by this tedious War, it might
prove fatal to spain. They were also in hopes, that the
fear of a foreign Enemy ceasing, the Hollanders in time
of Peace might fall into Divisions among themselves;
or at least, that Peace and Plenty might abate their
Courage. The spaniards did sufficiently shew their eagerness
for a Peace with Holland, by setting the Treaty
on foot in the Hague, by sending Ambrosius spinola himself,
among others, thither as Ambassadour, and by granting
and allowing them the East India Trade. Whereas
the Hollanders carried it very high, and would not
abate an ace of their Proposals. Truc• with Holland. 
          At last, a Truce for
twelve Years was concluded with Holland. In the
Year next following,1609. 
         Philip banished 900000 Marans
(the Off-spring of the ancient Moors, who had professed
themselves Christians only for a shew) out of
spain, because they intended to raise a Rebellion, and
had underhand craved Assistance from Henry IV. In
the same Year the spaniards took the Fortress of Arache,
situated on the Coast of Africa; as they had
likewise possessed themselves before of the Harbour of
Final,
         1602. near Genoua, in the Year 1619. Those of the
Valtelins did withdraw themselves from the Grisons. 
The spaniards sided with the former, in hopes to unite
them with the Dukedom of Milan. But France taking
part with the Grisons, the business was protracted
for a great many years, till at last matters were restored
to their former state. This difference did rouse
up all Italy, and the Pope himself took part with the
Grisons, tho Protestants, assisting them in the recovery
of the Valtelins. The War being broken out in
Germany, the spaniards sent Ambrose spinola out of
the Netherlands into the Palatinate, part of which was
subdued by them. Philip III. died in the Year 1621. 
§. 13. Philip IV. His son Philip IV. at the very beginning of
his Reign made great alterations in the Court, sending
away the Creatures of the Duke de Lerma, the Favourite
of his Father: He himself foreseeing what was
likely to befall him, did timely obtain a Cardinal's
Cap, fearing the King should aim at his Head. With
the beginning of the Reign of this King, the Truce
with Holland being expired, the War was rekindled,
in which spinola was forced to raise the siege of Bergen
op Zoom, because Christian Duke of Brunswick, and
General Mansfeld,
         1622. having before routed the spaniards
near Fleury, came to the assistance of the Hollanders. 
Pieter Heyn surprised the spanish silver Fleet, with a
Booty of 12 Millions of Gilders. 1628. At the same time
the Hollanders did settle themselves in Brasile, taking
the City of Olinda. In the Year 1629, the spaniards being
in hopes to make a considerable Diversion, and to
put the Dutch hard to it, made an Inrode into the Velaw,
and took Amersfort, whilst the Hollanders were busied
in the siege of Hertogenbusk Bois le Duc, but the Hollanders
taking Wesel by surprise, they were obliged to retreat
with all speed over the River Yssel, for fear, that
their retreat should be cut off by the Dutch. In the
Year 1639, a great Fleet was sent out of spain into the
Channel, under the Command of Don Oquendo, which
was destroied by Martin Tromp, in the Downs, in the
very sight of the English. What the Intention was of
sending so great a Fleet this way, was not generally
known at that time; but afterwards it was divulged,
that the same was intended against sweden, and that
there were 20000 Men ready in Denmark, which, as
soon as this Fleet should have appeared before Gothenburg,
were to have joined them and entered swedeland. 
Afterwards the War was protracted, but most
to the disadvantage of the spaniards, till the Year
1648, when the spaniards concluded a Peace with
the Hollanders at Munster, declaring them a free
People, renouncing all their pretences over them, and
leaving to them all the places which they had taken
from them. And notwithstanding France did its utmost
to hinder the conclusion of this Peace, at least
so long, till that Kingdom might also make a Peace

with spain; but the Hollanders did not think it adviseable
to stay their leisure, fearing, that if spain
was brought too low, the French would thereby be
enabled to swallow up the Netherlands, and become
their immediate Neighbours, which they foresaw
would prove fatal to their state. It was also alledged,
and that with good reason, That it was time to put up
the sword, when all those things might be obtained
by fair means for which it was drawn at first; and
that the Province of Holland had contracted considerable
Debts. spain also perceiving, that the Dutch
were not to be overcome by force, was willing to agree
to those Conditions, being glad to be rid once of
so troublesome an Enemy, that they might have the
more leisure to be even with France and Portugal. It
is reported, that this War cost the spaniards above
One thousand five hundred Millions of Ducats. In
the Year 1628, Vincent II. Duke of Mantua, dying,
the Emperour endeavoured to exclude Charles Duke of
Nevers, he being a Frenchman born, from the succession
of that Dukedom, under pretence of having neglected
some Matters appertaining to it, as being a Fief
of the Empire. The savoyards also took this opportunity
to renew their Pretensions upon Montferrat,
and the spaniards, in hopes of getting something in
the Fray, besieged Casal. On the other side, the
French took part with the Duke of Nevers, raised
the siege of Casal, and put the Duke of Nevers into
possession of the Dukedom of Mantua, which did
much weaken the Reputation of the spaniards in Italy. 
In the Year 1635, the French denounced War
against spain, under pretence, that they had taken
prisoner Philip Christopher Elector of Treves, he being
under the protection of the King of France, and
that they had driven the French Garrison out of Treves,
and possessed themselves of that City; but the true
reason was, that it was thought high time to bridle
the Ambition and Power of the House of Austria,
which after the Battel of Nordlingen, and the Peace
concluded at Prague, was grown very formidable, and
France being well settled at home, began to be in a
very flourishing condition. The French therefore, after

they had beat the Prince Tomaso near Avennes, entered
the Netherlands with a great Army, but the success
did not answer Expectation; the Dutch especially
being unwilling, that France should make any
considerable Conquests on that side: Neither did the
French gain any thing in Italy. In the Year next following
the Prince of Conde was forced to raise the siege
of Dole; and the spaniards entring Picardy filled Paris
it self with Terrour and Confusion. Gallas also,
the Imperial General, endeavoured to enter Burgundy
with his Army, but did not advance much. In the
Year 1637 the spaniards lost Landresi. In the next
Year they were forced to retire from before Leucate
with great loss; but the Prince of Conde, on the other
hand,1639. had the same ill fortune before Fonterabia; the
spaniards beat the French soundly near Thionville, but
lost Hesdin, salses and satins; and in the Year following,
the strong City of Arras, they being besides
this, routed near Casal: Nor could they with all
their strength force the Earl of Harcourt from before
Turin. 
         Catalonia rebels. 
          In the same Year also the Catalonians did revolt,
they being first dissatisfied at the Pride of the Duke
d'Olivarez, the King's Favourite, against whom they
had made great complaints, but were nevertheless
sorely oppressed by him. These discontents encreased
after the Catalonians, endeavouring the relief of salses,
were beaten, they pretending that they were not
duely assisted by the Castilians, and therefore left the
Army and marched home. Conte Duca taking this
opportunity, represented them very ill to the King,
and caused their Privileges to be considerably diminished,
and their Country to be oppressed with their
quartering of souldiers. This put them in open Rebellion,
and Barcellona beginning first, they drove the
spaniards out of Catalonia. Then seeking Aid from
France, they at last, after the spaniards had cut off
by their Cruelty, all hopes of Mercy, put themselves
under the Protection of that Kingdom: And it was
eleven Years before the spaniards could quite recover
Catalonia, the intestine Commotions in France presenting
them with a fair opportunity; for Barcellona,
being not timely relieved, was forced to surrender to

the spaniards;
         1651. but the Portugueses withdrawing
themselves from the Obedience of the spaniards,
         Portugal falls off from spain. 
          gave
a great shock to the spaniards. Philip II. tho he had
conquered this Kingdom,1640. yet had always endeavoured
by mildness, and by preserving their Privileges, to
mitigate the hatred which the Portugueses bore to the
Castilians, which were grown to that height, that the
Priests used to insert it in their Prayers, That God would
be pleased to deliver them from the Castilian Yoak:
But after his death the spanish Ministers had not been
so carefull by maintaining their Privileges, to keep
the affection of the Portugueses, but rather had treated
them as a conquered Nation; which so exasperated
the Portugueses, that as soon as they saw spain begin
to decline,1636. immediately some places in Portugal
did rebel, but were soon after reduced to their former
Obedience. The spaniards therefore thought it adviseable,
that to bridle this People, nothing could be
more proper, than by employing the Nobles as well as
the Commoners in the Wars, to purge the superfluous
ill Humours of this Nation. In the mean while the
Catalonians falling into Rebellion, the Portuguese
Nobles were ordered to go into the Field, which they
did not relish well; having besides this, some other
reasons to be dissatisfied with the spaniards: And, because
the Portugueses had a great affection for the
Duke of Braganza, the spaniards tried all ways to
entice him to come to Court, and supposing that
they had cajolled him sufficiently with fair promises,
invited him very courteously to go in person with the
King into the Field; which invitation, nevertheless
he knew how to decline very dexterously. At last
the Portuguese Nobility being hard pressed to serve
in the Expedition against the Catalonians,
         The Portugueses. which they
would in no ways consent to, unanimously agreed
to shake off the Castilian Yoak, and secretly sounded
the Inclinations of the Duke of Braganza. As soon
as he, upon the perswasions of his Lady, had re•olved
to accept of the Crown, they broke loose, and surprising
the Garrison in the City, Palace and Fort,
seized the ships, killed the secretary of state Vasconcello,
who had carried himself very proudly among

them,Duke of Braganza proclaimed King of Portugal. 
          and proclaimed the Duke of Braganza
King, under the Name of John IV. purging the whole
Kingdom within eight days of the Castilians, and that
with the loss only of two or three persons. Which
may serve as a remarkable instance to convince the
World, how easily a Kingdom is lost, where the
Peoples Inclination is averse to the supream Head. 
Thus the spanish Monarchy received a great blow, and
its Power being distracted, it could not act effectually
on all sides. 1642. They also lost Perpignan; tho the
French could not go further into spain, for the Prince
of Conde besieged Lerida in vain. 1647. In the Year 1641,
the Prince Monaco driving the spanish Garrisons out
of his Territories, put himself under the protection of
France. 
         Massan•llo's Rebellion at Naples, 1647. There also happened a most dangerous Rebellion
at Naples, the Head of which was a poor
Fisherman, whose Name was Massanello; who
might have put the whole Kingdom into a flame, if
the French had been at hand to give him timely assistance;
but by the prudent management of the Governour,
the Earl of Ognato, the Tumult was appeased. 
spain then being forced to quench the flames on
all sides, it could not be so mindfull of Holland, as the
most remote, having all hands full, to resist the dangers
threatning them nearer home. And the spaniards
had the good fortune to reduce, as we said before,
Catalonia, under their subjection, and to chase
the French out of Piombino and Porto Longone;
         1650. but
the English took from them the Island of Jamaica in
the West Indies. At last France being re-established
in its former Tranquility, the spaniards thought it
most convenient to make Peace with that Crown:
Which was concluded betwixt the two great Ministers
of state, the Cardinal Mazarini and Don Lewis de
Haro,
         The Pyrenean Treaty. in the Pyrenean Mountains: By vertue of which
France got Roussilion, and several considerable places
in the Netherlands. spain having thus concluded a
Peace with all the rest of its Neighbours, it began in
earnest to make War against Portugal. The spaniards
therefore entered Portugal with a great Force, taking
from the Portugueses several places, but were also
at several places soundly beaten. The Battel near

         Entremos,
         1662. where Don Juan, and that near Villa Viciosa,
where Caracena received a fatal Defeat,1665. are most
famous: The obtaining of which two Victories on
the Portuguese side is chiefly ascribed to the French
General schomberg. Philip IV. died in the Year 1665. §. 14. Charles II. He had for his successour his son Charles II. 
a Child of four years of age, who under the Tuition
of his Mother, negligently prosecuted the War against
Portugal,
         1668. and at last, by the Mediation of England,
was forced to make Peace with that Crown,Peace with Portugal. 
          renouncing
his right to the same; because the French at that
time made a grievous havock in the Netherlands. For
tho' Mary Teresia, Daughter of Philip IV. at the
time when she was married to the King of France had
renounced all her right of succession to her paternal
Inheritance, yet the French taking the opportunity of
their flourishing condition, and the decaied state of
spain, England also and Holland being engaged in a
War with one another, who would else not have left
the Netherlands to be devoured by them; they entered
Flanders with a vast Army, using among other
things, for a pretence, that which in Brabant is called,
Jus devolutionis, by which the real Estates of
private persons, fall to the Children born during the
time of the first marriage, as soon as the Father
marries again. The French took in this War, without
much resistance, a great many considerable Cities
and Forts, viz. Charleroy, Tournay, Lisle, Douay,
Oudenarde, and some others; they conquered also the
whole Franche Compte, which hastened the Peace betwixt
England and Holland,
         The Tripple Alliance. and occasioned the Tripple
Alliance, as it is called, made betwixt England, sweden
and Holland, for the preservation of the spanish
Netherlands. In the following Year France made a
Peace with spain at Aix la Chapelle,
         Peace made at Aix la Chapelle. restoring to spain
the Franche Compte, but keeping what places he had
taken in Flanders. 
         1668. But when Holland, in the Year
1672, was attacked by the French, spain sided with
the Dutch, knowing that the loss of the Ʋnited Provinces
must draw after it that of the spanish Netherlands:
so it came again to an open War, wherein, at first,

         spain lost Burgundy. The rebellious Messineses threw
themselves under the protection of France, but were
afterwards deserted by them. France also got Limburgh,
Conde,
         Peace made as Nimmegen, 1679. 
         Valencienne, Cambray, Ypres, st. Omer,
Aeth and Ghent: But a Peace was concluded at
Nimmegen, by virtue of which France kept the Franche
Compte, and most places taken in the Netherlands,
restoring only to spain, Limburgh, Ghent, Cortryck,
Oudenarde, Aeth and Charleroy. 
        §. 15. The Nature of the spaniards. 
          Having thus given a brief History of the
Kingdom of spain, we will also add something concerning
the Genius of the spaniards, and the extent of
their Territories, as also of the strength and Weakness
of this Kingdom, and its Condition in reference to its
Neighbours: The spanish Nation therefore is commonly
esteemed to be very wise, and to take remote
prospects, throughly weighing a thing before it undertakes
it. Whereby, nevertheless the spaniards, being
overcautious and exact in their Counsels, do often
lose the opportunities of action. Besides this, the
spaniards are very constant to their Resolutions; and
tho' they fail once in an Attempt, they will try their
Fortune again, endeavouring to overcome its frowns
by their Constancy. They are very fit for War, and
not only brave at the first attack, but also will hold
out till the last; their sober way of living, and spare
Bodies make them fit to bear Hunger and Thirst, and
to be very watchfull: But this the spaniards are extreamly
blamed for, that they maintain their Gravity
by high-flown Words and a proud Behaviour. Tho'
those that converse with them, do declare, that this Gravity
which appears so odious, is not so much the effect
of their Pride, as of a melancholy Constitution and an
ill Custom, they never being fond to converse much
with Foreign Nations. They are in general, very
zealous for the Roman Catholick Religion, and abominate
all others. They are seldom fit for any Trade or
Business where any hard labour is required; such as
Husbandry, or any Handycraft Trades; wherefore
these are chiefly managed among them by Foreigners. 
It is credibly reported, That in Madrid alone, there

are above 40000 Frenchmen, being for the most part,
Merchants, Artists, Handycrafts-men and Labourers,
who go under the Name of Burgundians, thereby to
avoid the hatred, which the spaniards naturally bear
against the French. And such is the spanish pride,
that tho' they think it below themselves to meddle
with those trifles, yet they do not think much to be a
poor Centinel in some Fort or another all their life
time, the honour of the sword, and hopes of becoming
in time an Officer, making them amends for what
hardship they endure. Their Pride, Covetousness and
rigorous proceedings make them hatefull to all such
as are under their Command; which are very unfit
Qualifications for the maintaining of great Conquests. 
For no body is willing to be despised by Foreign Governours. 
spain being mightily exhausted of Men,
and therefore incapable of raising great Armies within
it self, is very unfit to maintain vast Countries, for
which several reasons may be given. For the Women
here are not so fruitfull as in the Northern parts,
which is to be attributed to the heat of the Climate,
and the constitution of their spare Bodies. Those
parts also which are remote from the sea-shore, are
not well peopled, some of these Grounds being very
barren, not producing any thing for the subsistance of
Mankind. Whoring also being publickly allowed of
here; a great many of them will rather make shift
with a Whore than to maintain a Wife and Children. 
These also, who have taken upon them holy Orders,
of whom there is a great number, are obliged not to
marry. The Wars which they have waged against so
many Nations, but especially in Italy and the Netherlands,
have devoured a great many spaniards. A vast
number have transplanted themselves into America,
being glad to go to a place where they may with a
small beginning come to live very plentifully. Before
the discovery was made of America, Ferdinand the
Catholick, had at once before the City of Granada,
an Army of 50000 Foot and 20000 Horse, tho' Arragon
did not concern it self in that War, and Portugal
and Navarre were at that time not united with Castile. 
At last this Country was mightily dispeopled,

when Ferdinand, after the taking of Granada, and
Philip III. banished a great many thousands of Jews
and Marans, who could not be kept in obedience in
spain; these settling themselves in Africa, retain to
this day their hatred against the Christians, robbing
their ships in those seas. But this is evident enough,
that the spaniards could never have made a Conquest
of those vast Countries, by force of Arms, if the
greatest part of them had not fallen into their Hands
by easier ways. §. 16. The Constitution of the spanish Countries. Concerning those Countries which are under
the Jurisdiction of this Nation; spain is large enough
in extent for the number of its Inhabitants, but it is
not fertile alike in all places; for the most remote
parts from the sea-coasts are many of them barren,
not producing any thing for the subsistance of Men or
Beasts: But for the most part, nearer to the sea-side, it
is very fine and fruitfull. There is abundance of sheep
here. They have also very fine Horses, but not in
very great quantities, having scarce enough for their
own use. This Kingdom is very well situate for
Trade, having on the one side the Ocean, and on the
other side, being almost surrounded by the Mediterranean,
where they have most excellent Harbours. 
The product of their Grounds and Commodities fit
for Exportation, are especially, Wooll, silk, Wine,
Oyl, Raisons, Almonds, Figs, Citrons, Rice, soap,
Iron, salt, and such like. In former times the spanish
Gold-mines were most famous, but now-a-days, neither
Gold nor silver, as far as I know, is digged out
in spain: some will alledge for a reason, That it is
forbidden under severe penalties, to keep it as a reserve
in case of a great extremity. But I am rather
apt to believe, That those Gold-mines have been long
a-goe quite exhausted by the Avarice of the spaniards. 
        §. 17. The spanish West Indies. The greatest Revenue of spain comes from
the East Indies, from whence Gold and silver, like
Rivulets are conveyed into spain, and from thence
into the other parts of Europe. At what time, and
by whom this Country, which had been so long unknown

to the Europeans, was first discovered, we have
already mentioned. Tho' there are that pretend,
That America was discovered in the Year 1190, by
one Madoe, son to Owen Gesneth, a Prince in Wales,
who they say, made two Voyages thither; and having
built a Fort in Florida or Virginia, or as some say, in
Mexico, died in America: And this is the reason why
in the Mexican Tongue abundance of British words
are to be met withall; and that the spaniards, at their
first coming into America did find the remnants of
some Christian Customs among the Inhabitants: From
whence some inferr, That if the first discovery of a Country,
gives a good Title of Propriety to the Discoverers,
England would have as good, if not a better Title to
America than spain; but this we will leave to be decided
by others. But it is not so evident, from
whence spain could claim a right of subduing that
Countrey by force of Arms. For, what is alledged among
other pretences, concerning the Bull of Alexander
VI. wherein he did grant those Countries to
spain, this does not only seem ridiculous to us, but
also to those Barbarians themselves, who have ridiculed
it, saying, The Pope must be a strange sort of a Man,
who pretended to give away that which was none of his
own: But let this be as it will, the spaniards think it
sufficient that they are in possession of it; and if an
exact scrutiny should be made into other matters of
this nature, it would appear, that the Titles to most
conquered Countries were none of the best. But
some of the most conscientious spaniards do not justifie
what Cruelties, their Country-men committed in
the beginning against those poor People, of whom
they killed, without any provocation given, a great
many hundred thousands; or destroyed them by
forcing them to undergo intolerable hardships, and
making the rest their slaves: Tho' afterwards Charles
V. being informed of their miserable condition, ordered
all the rest of the Americans to be set at liberty. 
But the spaniards are not Masters of all America, but
only of the middle part of it, viz. The Kingdoms of
Peru and Mexico, and those vast Islands of Hispaniola,
Cuba and Porto Ricco, Jamaica having been taken

from them by the English. These parts of America
are now-a-days inhabited by five several sorts of People:several sorts of Inhabitants in the spanish West Indies. 
         
The first are the spaniards, who come thither
out of Europe; these are put in all Offices. The second
are called Crioliens, who are born in America
of spanish Parents: These are never emploied in any
Office, as being ignorant of the spanish Affairs, and
too much addicted to love their native Country of America;
wherefore the King is cautious in giving them
any Command, fearing, lest they should withdraw
themselves from the Obedience of spain, and set up
a Government of their own; especially, because these
Crioliens bear a great hatred against the European
spaniards. For this reason also the Governours are
changed every three Years, to take away the opportunity
of strengthening their Interest too much; who
after their return into spain are made Members of the
Council for the Indies, as being esteemed the most
proper to advise concerning the preservation of that
Country. The third sort are called Metiffs, who are
born of a spanish Father and an Indian Mother, are in
no esteem among them. Those who are brought
forth of the marriage of a spaniard with a Metiff,
or of a Metiff and a spanish Woman, are called Quatralvos,
as having three parts of a spaniard, and one
of an Indian: But such as are born of a Metiff and an
Indian Woman, or of an Indian Man and a Metiffic
are called Tresalvos, as having three parts of an Indian
and one of a spaniard. The fourth sort are the remnants
of the ancient Inhabitants, of whom a great many
are to be met with, especially in the Kingdoms of
Peru and Mexico, who are not so Barbarous as some
may imagine, there having been found among them
such excellent Laws and Constitutions as would make
some Europeans blush. The fifth sort are the Moores,
or, as the spaniards call them, Negroes, who being
bought in Africa are sent thither to do all sorts of
drudgery. These are generally very handy, but very
perfidious and refractary, wherefore they must always
be kept under a strict hand. such as are born of a
Negro and an Indian Woman are called Mulats: Yet
is that part of America, considering its bigness, not

very well stocked with People, since the spaniards did
in a most cruel manner root out the most of its ancient
Inhabitants: And if I remember well, Hieronymus
Benzonus says, That all the Cities in America, which
are inhabited by the spaniards, joined together, were
scarce to be compared, for number of People, with the
suburbs of Milan: Yet there are some who talk largely
concerning Mexico, viz. That it has betwixt 30
and 40000 spanish Citizens, who are most of them
very wealthy, so that it is reported, there are 18000
Coaches kept in that City. The spaniards are not easily
to be beaten out of America; because most places
which are in their possession, are hard to come at, and
it is very difficult to transport such a number of souldiers
out of Europe, as can be sufficient to attack any
of these places: Besides this, the great difference of the
Climate, and Diet could not but occasion mortal sicknesses
among them: But in Peru, especially, they are
very well settled, there being scarce any access by
Land, and by sea you are obliged to go round the
south and remotest parts of America, or else to come
from the East Indies; both which are such long seavoyages,
which an Army can scarce undergo without
running the hazard of being destroied by sickness. 
Concerning the Riches of America,
         Riches of America. 
          'tis true, the spaniards
at their first coming thither did find no coined
Gold or silver, that being unknown in those days to
the Inhabitants; but an inconceivable quantity of
uncoined Gold and silver, and abundance of Gold
and silver Vessels made without Iron Tools, all which
the spaniards carried into spain, except what the
seas swallowed up in their Voyages, which was very
considerable: But now-a-days those Rivers which
formerly used to carry a Golden sand, are most exhausted;
and what is found there now is all dug up
out of the Mines; especially the silver Mines of Porosi
in Peru, do afford an incredible quantity of silver,
which is yearly, together with some other Commodities,
transported in a Fleet into spain: Nevertheless
a great part of this silver belonging to Italian, French,
English and Dutch Merchants, the least part of it remains
in spain; so that the spaniards keep the Cow,

but others have the Milk: Wherefore, when the
French and spanish Ambassadours at Rome quarreled about
Precedency,1563. and the latter, to represent his
Master's Greatness, spoke very largely of the vast
Riches of America, the Frenchman answered, That
all Europe, but especially spain, had been a considerable
loser by them: The spaniards having employed
themselves in searching after the Treasures of America,
were thereby become idle, and had dispeopled their own
Country. The King of spain trusting to his great
Riches, had begun unnecessary Wars. spain being the
fountain from whence vast Riches were derived to other
Nations, did receive the least benefit of all by
them, since those Countries that furnished spain with
souldiers, and other Commodities did draw those Riches
to themselves. Formerly there were also Emeraulds in
America, and Pearls were found, but that stock is
long since, by the Avarice of the spaniards, quite exhausted. 
There is besides this, a great quantity of
Commodities in America, which are used in Physick
and Dying Colours. There is also great quantities of
sugars and Hides, as appears in that in the Year 1587
the spainsh Fleet transported 35444 Hides from
st. Domingo, and 64350 from New spain: For the
Oxen and Cows, which were first transported from
spain into America, are grown so numerous, that they
shoot them for their Hides sake only, throwing away
the Flesh, which is scarce eatable. And as America
is the best Appendix of the spanish Kingdom, so
the spaniards take all imaginable care to prevent its
being separated from spain. They make, among other
things, use of this Artifice, That they will not allow
any Manufactory to be set up in America, so that
the Inhabitants cannot be without the European Commodities,
which they do not suffer to be transported
thither in any other ships but their own. §. 18. Besides this,The Canary Islands. the Canary Islands are in the
possession of the spaniards, from whence are exported
great quantities of sugar and Wine, it is credibly reported,
That England alone transports above 13000
Pipes of Canary, at 20l. per Pipe. The Island of

         sardinia also belongs to the spaniards,
         sardinia. which Isle is
pretty large, but not very rich, its Inhabitants being
for the most part Barbarians. 
         sicily. The Isle of sicily is of
much greater value, from whence great quantities of
Corn and silk are to be exported; but the Inhabitants
are an ill sort of People, who must be kept under,
according to the old Proverb, Insulani quidem
mali, siculi autom pessimi. Unto sicily does belong the
Isles of Maltha and Goza, which was given in Fief
from Charles V. to the Order of the Knights of
Rhodes. spain also has a great part of Italy in its possession,Naples. 
         viz. The Kingdom of Naples, who's Capital
City is scarce bridled by three Castles. The sovereignty
of siena, and a great many strong sea-ports,
and the sea-coasts of Tuscany, viz. Orbitello, Porto
Hercule, Telamone, Monte Argentario, Porto Longone,
and the Castle of Piombino; besides that noble Dukedom
of Milan,
         Milan. which is the Paradise of Italy, as Italy
is commonly called the Paradise of Europe: They
have also the Harbour of Final upon the Genouese
Coast. In the City of Milan, Trade and Manufactory
flourishes extreamly, and this Dukedom is much valued
by the spaniards, because they have thereby a
convenient Correspondence with the House of Austria. 
As long as Burgundy and the Netherlands were united,The Netherlands. 
they might be compared to a Kingdom; but now Burgundy
is lost, the seven united Provinces have separated
themselves from the rest of the Netherlands, and
France has conquered a great part of the remainder. 
And tho' in the spanish Netherlands there are very
fair and strong Cities left, yet nevertheless it seems,
that the greatest benefit which spain receives from
them amounts to this, That by them the French
Arms are diverted from the other spanish Territories,
that they commonly draw the seat of War thither,
and serve to take off the edge of the French Fury. In
the East Indies the Philippine Islands belong to the spaniards,
         The Philippine Islands. 
whose Capital City being Manilla, was taken
by them in the Year 1565: but these Islands are so
inconsiderable, that it has been often under debate,
whether it were not most convenient to abandon
them: Yet some Indian Commodities, which from

several places, and especially from China are brought
to Manilla, are from thence transported to New-spain
and Mexico, whereby there is kept a constant
Communication betwixt the spanish West and East
Indies. 
        §. 19. From what has been said it is evident,strength and Weakness of spain. 
          that
spain is a potent Kingdom, which has under its Jurisdiction,
rich and fair Countries, abounding with all
Necessaries, not only sufficient for the use of its Inhabitants,
but also affording a great overplus for Exportation. 
The spaniards also do not want Wisdom in
managing their state Affairs, nor Valour to carry on
a War: Nevertheless this vast Kingdom has its Infirmities,
which have brought it so low, that it is scarce
able to stand upon its own Legs: Among those is to
be esteemed one, the want of Inhabitants in spain,
there being not a sufficient number both to keep in obedience
such great Provinces, and at the same time
to make Head against a potent Enemy; which want
is not easily to be repaired out of those Countries
which are under their subjection, since it is the Interest
of spain, rather to restrain the Courage of these
Inhabitants, for fear they should one time or another
take Heart, and shake off the spanish Yoak. And
whenever they raise some souldier in these Provinces,
they cannot trust them with the defence of their Native
Country, but are obliged to disperse them, by
sending them into other Parts, under the Command
only of spaniards: spain therefore is scarce able to
raise within it self, a sufficient number of souldiers for
the Guard and Defence of its frontier places: Wherefore,
whenever spain happens to have War with other
Nations, it is obliged to make use of Foreign souldiers,
and to raise those, is not only very chargeable but also
the King is not so well assured of their Faith, as of
that of his own subjects. The want of Inhabitants is
also one reason, why spain cannot now-a-days keep a
considerable Fleet at sea, which nevertheless is extreamly
necessary to support the Monarchy of that
Kingdom. Another weakness is, That the spanish
Provinces are mightily dis-joined, they being divided

by vast seas and Countries: These therefore cannot be
maintained and governed without great difficulty;
for the Governours of the Provinces being remote from
the sight of the Prince, he cannot take so exact an
account of their Actions; and the oppressed subjects
want often opportunity to make their Complaints to
the King; besides that, Men and Money are with
great charge and danger sent out of spain into these
Provinces, without hopes of ever returning into the
Kingdom. Their strength cannot be kept together,
as being obliged to divide their Forces. The more disjoined
these Provinces are, the more frontier Garrisons
are to be maintained; all which may be saved in a
Kingdom, whose parts are not so much dis-joined. 
They are also liable to being attacked in a great many
places at once, one Province not being able to assist
another: Besides this, America being the Treasury of
spain, is parted from it by the vast Ocean, whereby
their silver Fleets are subject to the hazard of the seas
and Pyrates. And if it happens that such a Fleet is
lost, the whole Government must needs suffer extreamly
by the want of it, the Inhabitants of spain
being so exhausted, as not to be able to raise sufficient
summs to supply the Publick Necessities. The spaniards
are also mighty deficient in regulating their
West India Trade, which is so ill managed, that the
greatest part of those Riches are conveyed to other
Nations, whereby they are empoured to chastise spain
with its own Money. After the death of Philip II. it
has also proved very prejudicial to spain, that by the
carelessness of the succeeding Kings, and during the long
Minority of this present, the Nobles have so increased
their Power, that they are now very backward in
duely assisting the King, and by impoverishing the
King and Commonalty have got all the Riches to
themselves. It is also a common Disease in all Governments,
where the Popish Religion has got the
upper hand, That the Popish Clergy is very rich and
potent, and yet pretends, by a Divine Right, to be
exempted from all publick burdens, except that some
of them in the utmost extremity vouchsafe to contribute
some small portion for the defence of the whole,

but that not without consent of the Pope: Yet the
King of spain has that Prerogative, which he obtained
from Pope Hadrian IV. that he has the disposal of
all the chief Church Benefices in his Kingdom; and he
is also Head and Master of all the Ecclesiastical Orders
of Knighthood in spain. And because the Kings
of spain have hitherto pretended to be the most zealous
Protectours of the Papal Chair and Religion,
they have thereby so obliged the Zealots of the Roman
Catholick Religion, and especially the Jesuits, that
these have always been endeavouring to promote the
Interest of spain. 
        §. 20. Lastly,In what condition spain is in, in reference to its Neighbours, and especially as to Barbary. 
          It is also worth our observation,
how spain does behave it self in relation to its Neighbours,
and what Good or Evil it may again expect
from them. spain therefore is opposite to the Coast
of Barbary, having also several Forts on that side, viz. 
Pegnon de Velez, Oran, Arzilla, and would be better
if they had also Algiers and Tunis. From hence spain
need not fear any thing now, since it has quite freed it
self from the very Remnants of the Moors: But the Pyracies
committted by those Corsaires is not so hurtfull
to spain, as to other Nations, who traffique with spain,
Italy or Turky; for the spaniards seldom export their
own Commodities into the other parts of Europe, but
these are exported by other Nations. Turky. The Turks
seem to be pretty near to the Islands of sicily and sardinia,
and to the Kingdom of Naples: Yet are they
not much feared by the spaniards; the sea which
lies betwixt them being an obstacle against making a
Descent with a considerable Army in any of those
Parts; and if an Army should be landed, its Provisions,
which must come by sea, might easily be cut
off: For in such a case all the states of Italy would
be obliged to side with the spaniards to keep this
cruel Enemy from their Borders, and their Naval
strength joined together, much surpasses the Turks in
every respect. Italian states. 
          From the Italian states, the spaniards
have little to fear, it being a maxim with them, to
preserve the Peace of Italy, thereby to take away all
opportunity from France to get a footing in Italy,
         
which is also a general maxim among all the states
of Italy: Nevertheless this is most certain, That if
spain should endeavour to encroach upon the rest of
the Italian states, they would unanimously oppose it;
and if they should find themselves too weak to oppose
their Designs, they might be easily wrought upon to
call France to their aid. The Pope. The Pope, perhaps, might
be willing enough to be Master of the Kingdom of
Naples, spain holding the same in Fief of the Papal
Chair, and thereby the Popes might have a fresh opportunity
to enrich their Kindred: But the Pope
wants Power to execute such a Design, and the rest
of the states of Italy would not be forward to see so
considerable a Country added to the Ecclesiastical
state; and the Pope's Kindred are more for gathering
of Riches out of the present Ecclesiastical Revenues,
than to bestow the same upon an uncertain War. On
the other side, spain having found it very beneficial
for its Interest, to pretend to the chief Protectorship
of the Roman Religion, and that the Pope's good or
bad Inclinations towards it, may either prove advantageous
or disadvantageous, spain has always endeavoured
by all means to keep fair with the Popes. 
France, on the contrary, having taken part with the
Protestants, whom spain and the House of Austria
have sought to oppress, has demonstrated sufficiently
to the Roman Court, that it is not so fond of that Religion,
as to neglect an opportunity to enrich himself
with the Possessions of the Protestants, and to make
way for attaining to the so long projected Design of the
Universal Monarchy; which done, he might easily
make the Pope his Chaplain: Wherefore the chief aim
of the wisest Popes has been, to keep the Power of
spain and France in an equal Balance, this being the
most proper method to keep up the Authority and
provide for the security of the Popedom. It being
the principal maxim of the Venetians,
         Venice. to reserve their
Liberty and state, by maintaining the Peace of Italy,
spain has no reason to be jealous of them as long as it
undertakes nothing against them. It is also the Interest,
as well of them as of all the other Italian states,
that the spaniards remain in possession of Milan, for

fear, if France should become Master of this Dukedom,
it might thereby be put in a way to conquer
all the rest of Italy. On the other side, if spain should
shew the least Inclination to undertake any thing against
the Liberty of Italy, it cannot expect, but that
the Venetians, if not by an open War, at least, by
their Counsels and Money would oppose it: For the
rest, this state endeavours to remain Neuter betwixt
France and spain, and to keep fair with both of them,
as long as they do not act against their Interest; Genoua
is of great consequence to the spaniards,
         Genouae. from
which, depends in a great measure, the security and
Preservation of the Milaneze: Wherefore, when
Charles V. could not effect his Intention of building
a Castle (being opposed therein by Andreas Doria)
whereby he intended to make the Genoueses dance after
his Pipe, the spaniards found out another way to
make them dependent on their Interest, by borrowing
vast summs of Money from the Genoueses upon the
security of the King's Revenues in spain. Besides
this, they are possessed of the Harbour of Final on the
Coast of Genoua, whereby they have taken away the
power from them of cutting off the Correspondency
betwixt spain and Milan. spain has great reason to
give in a good Correspondency with savoy;
         savoy. for if that
Prince should side with France against it, the Milaneze
would be in eminent danger of being lost. But
because it would be very pernicious for savoy, if the
King of France should become Master of Milan,
since savoy would be then surrounded on all sides by
the French, it is easie for spain to maintain a good
Correspondency with savoy. Florence and the rest of
the Italian Princes have all the reason to be cautious
how to offend spain, yet, as much as in them lies,
they would scarce suffer spain to encroach upon any of
them. It is also of consequence to the spaniards to
live in friendship with the suiss,
         The suiss. partly because they
must make use of such souldiers as are listed among
them; partly because they may be very serviceable in
preserving the Milaneze; and their Friendship is best
preserved by Money. But, because the suiss are of
several Religions, spain is in greater Authority with

the Roman Catholick Cantons, but France with the
Protestant Cantons, which being the most potent, yet
have, either cajolled by fair Words, or Money, or
out of Fear, connived at the Frenches becoming Masters
of the County of Burgundy in the last War,
whereas formerly they used to take effectual care for
its preservation. Holland. The Hollanders were before the Peace
of Munster the most pernicious Enemies to spain;
but since the Conclusion of that Peace there is no
cause that spain should fear any thing from them,
since I do not see any reason, why these should attack
spain, or endeavour to take any thing from them,
having enough to do to maintain what they have already
got. And, if they should be tempted to attempt
any thing against the West Indies, they would
not only meet with great resistance from the spaniards
there, but also France and England would not easily
suffer, that both the East and West Indies, the two
Fountains from whence such vast Riches are derived,
should be in possession of the Dutch: And the Dutch,
as for their own Interests, obliged to take care, that
France, by swallowing up the rest of the Netherlands,
may not become their next Neighbour on the Land,
or that it should obtain any considerable advantage against
spain. 
         German•. The Power of Germany spain may consider
as its own, as far as the same depends on the House
of Austria. And it is not long ago, since the states
of Germany were persuaded to take upon them afresh
the Guaranty of the Circle of Burgundy; whereby
spain hoped to have united its Interest with that of the
German Empire against France; since, whenever a
War happens betwixt these two Crowns, it is scarce
possible, that this Circle should escape untouched, it
being the most convenient place where they may attack
one another with vigour. England. 
         England is capable of
doing most damage to the spaniards at sea, and especially
in the West Indies: But England, in all likelyhood,
would be no great gainer by it, since the English
have a vast Trade with the spanish sea-ports, and
their Trade in the Levant would suffer extreamly from
the spanish Privateers; but also Holland could not
look with a good Eye upon these Conquests of the

         English. 
         Portugal. 
         Portugal, by it self, cannot much hurt spain,
but in conjunction with another Enemy, it is capable
of making a considerable Diversion at home. 
But the Portugueses could not propose any considerable
Advantages to themselves thereby; and it
might easily happen, that Holland siding with spain
might take from hence an opportunity to drive the
Portugueses quite out of the East Indies. The King
of France,
         France. therefore, is the capital and most formidable
Enemy to spain, who wanting not Power, not
only longs to devour the rest of the Netherlands,
but also aims at the Conquest of other parts of spain. 
But if the old Maxims of Policy are not grown quite
out of date, it is to be hoped, that all who have any
Interest in the preservation of spain, will with all
their power endeavour to prevent, that the ruin of
spain, the Liberty and Possessions of all the states in
Europe may not depend on the Pleasure and Will of
one single person. What may be the consequence of the Extinction of the Royal Family. But what Revolution may happen
in spain if the present Royal Family, which has
no Heirs yet, should fail, is beyond Human Understanding
to determine or foresee; because it is to be
feared, that upon such an occasion, not only France
would do its utmost to obtain it, but also, because
several states which were annexed to spain, by the
Royal Family, might take an opportunity to withdraw
themselves from the same. CHAP. III. Of Portugal. §. 1. POrtugal,
         The Origin of the Kingdom of Portugal. 
          which comprehends the greatest part
of that Province which the Romans called
Lusitania, fell, with the rest of spain, under the last
Gothick King Roderick, into the Hands of the Moors,
who were in possession of it for a long time; but in
the Year 1093, Alfonsus VI. King of Castile and Le
           •n,
arming himself with all his Power to attack the

         Moors; and craving also the Assistance of Foreign
Princes, among others; also, came one Henry, to signalize
himself in this War, whose Pedigree is variously
related by the Historians. For some will have him
descended out of the House of Burgundy, and have
made him a younger son of Robert Duke of Burgundy,
whose Father was Robert King of France, son of
Hugh Capet. Others derive his Pedigree from the
House of Loraine, alledging, That the reason of his
being called a Burgundian was, because he was born
at Besanson. 
         Henry Earl of Portugal. To this Henry, King Alfonsus VI. gave
in marriage his natural Daughter Theresia, as a reward
of his Valour, giving unto him for a Dowry, under
the Title of an Earldom, all that part of Portugal
which was then in the possession of the Christians;
which comprehended that part of the Country, where
are the Cities of Braga, Coimbria, Visco, Lamego, and
Porto, as also that tract of Ground which is now called
Tralos Montes, granting to him also a power to
conquer the rest of that Country, as far as to the River
of Guadiana, and to keep it under his Jurisdiction;
yet with these conditions, That he should be a Vassal
of spain, repair to the Dyets of that Kingdom, and
in case of a War, be obliged to serve with 300 Horse. 
Henry died in the Year 1112,Alfonsus I. King of Portugal. leaving a son whose
name was Alfonsus, being then very young: His Inheritance
was, during his Minority, usurped by Ferdinand
Potz, Count of Trastamara, his Father-in-law,
he having married his Mother. But as soon as he was
grown up, he took up Arms against his Father-in-law,
beat him out of Portugal, but his Mother he put in
Prison; who calling to her aid Alfonsus VII. he promised
to dis-inherit her son, and to give him all Portugal. 
But Alfonsus of Portugal defeated the Castilians
in a Battel, by which Victory he pretended to
have freed himself from the spanish subjection. 1126. This
Alfonsus undertook an Expedition against King Ismar,
         1139. 
who had his Kingdom on the other side of the River
Tajo, who being joined by the Forces of four other petty
Moorish Kings, drew out against him. Alfonsus was
then in his Camp near Cabebas des Reyes proclaimed
King, thereby to animate his souldiers; and get a

most signal Victory,The Origin of the five shields in the Arms of Portugal. 
          taking the five standards of those
Kings, whence he put five shields in the Arms of
Portugal, and retained ever after the Title of King. 
He took afterwards a great many Cities from the
Moors; and among the rest, with the assistance of
the Netherland Fleet the City of Lisbon in the Year
1147. 1179. This Alfonsus was taken Prisoner near Badajoz,
by Ferdinand King of Egypt, who gave him his
Freedom without any other Ransom, than that he
was to restore to him some Cities, which he had taken
from him in Gallicia. After he had reigned very
gloriously, and greatly enlarged the Limits of his
Kingdom,1185. he died in the 91st Year of his Age. §. 2. Him succeeded his son sanctius,
         sanctius I. who built
a great many Cities, and filled them with Inhabitants. 
He took from the Moors the City of selva, being assisted
in that Expedition, by a Fleet sent out of the
Netherlands to the Holy Land. He was, during his
whole Reign, always in action with the Moors, and
died in the Year 1212. Alfonsus II. After him reigned his son Alfonsus
sirnamed Crassus, who did nothing worth
mentioning, but that, with the help of the Netherlanders,
who went to the Holy Land, he took from the
Moors the City of Alcassar. He died in the Year 1223. 
His son sanctius,
         sanctius II. sirnamed Capellus, succeeded him;
who being very careless, and ruled by his Wife, was
excluded from the Administration of the Government
by the Portugueses, who conferred it on Alfonsus his
Brother. sanctius died an Exile in Toledo. The Portugueses
have made this observation concerning him,1246. 
that he was the only Portuguese King who died without
leaving either Legitimate Children or Bastards behind
him. Alfonsus III. 
         Alfonsus, the Brother of sanctius, parted
from his Lady Mathildis, Countess of Boulogne, she
being somewhat Ancient and Barren, and married
Beatrice, Daughter to Alfonsus X. King of Castile,
with whom he had for a Dowry the County of Algarbia;
but the Pope being dissatisfied with this Divorce,
excommunicated both him and the whole
Kingdom. He reigned very laudably, and united a
great many Cities to his Kingdom, and died in the

Year 1279. The extraordinary Virtues of his son
Dionysius,
         Dionysius. especially, Justice, Liberality and Constancy,
are highly extolled by the Portugueses: He having
also adorned the Kingdom with a great many publick
Buildings, among which is the Academy of Conimbria,
first founded by him. There is an old Proverb
concerning him, used among the Portugueses, El Rey
D. Denys, qui fiz quanto quin: King Dionysius, who
did whatsoever he pleased. He died in the Year 1325;
his son. Alfonsus IV. Alfonsus IV. sirnamed the Brave, was very
glorious for his Atchievements both in Peace and War;
but he banished his Bastard Brother, who was greatly
beloved both by his Father and the People; and
caused D. Agnes de Castro, a very beautiful Lady,
who was without his consent married to his son Pieter,
barbarously to be murthered; which so exasperated
Pieter, that he taking up Arms against the Father,
did considerable mischief, till at last the business was
composed. Pieter. He died in the Year 1357. His son Pieter
was commonly called the Cruel, tho' some will
have this rather to have been spoken to his praise, as
having been an exact observer of Justice, never sparing
any Offender. He died in the Year 1368. His
son Ferdinand contended with Henry the Bastard,Ferdinand. who
had murthered his Brother Pieter, sirnamed the Cruel,
King of Castile, about the Kingdom of Castile, because
his Mother Beatrice had been Daughter of sanctius
IV. King of Castile; and a great many of the
Nobility and some Cities of that Kingdom declaring
for him, he waged War against the forementioned
Henry. But he being too strong for him, he could not
maintain his Pretensions, but was obliged to make
Peace. 1373. However the War broke out afresh again betwixt
them, because Ferdinand had protected some
who were banished out of Castile for High Treason,
neither would, upon demand, surrender them. To
revenge this, Henry made an inrode into Portugal, and
finding no resistance, over-ran the greatest part of the
Country. After the death of Henry, Ferdinand made
a Peace with his son John, but the same was soon violated
again by the Portugueses, who encouraged the
Duke of Lancaster, that married Constantia Daughter

of Pieter King of Castile, to pretend to the Crown of
Castile: He came with a good Army into Portugal;
but the English being quickly grown weary of the
War in spain, and living very disorderly in Portugal,
a Peace was concluded on both sides. At last Ferdinand
married his Daughter Beatrice to John of Castile,
under condition, that such Children as were born of
their Bodies, should succeed in the Kingdom of Portugal;
which was afterwards the occasion of bloody
Wars. This Ferdinand, who by his frequent Wars
had proved very pernicious to Portugal, died in the
Year 1383, being the last of the true Race of the
Kings of Portugal. 
        §. 3. After the death of Ferdinand great Troubles
arose in Portugal,
         Interregnum. most of the Portugueses not being
able to brook living under the subjection of the Castilians,
whom they mortally hated. It was, 'tis
true, agreed on in the Articles of Marriage made betwixt
the King of Castile and Beatrice Daughter of
Ferdinand, That her Mother Eleonora should have the
Administration of the Government in Portugal, till
such Children as should be born of this Marriage
should be of age: But this Eleonora, leaving all to the
management of the Count of Ancira, her much suspected
Favourite, she drew upon her self the hatred of
the Portugueses. John, therefore, natural son of Pieter
King of Portugal, privately murthered him, whereby
he got both the Favour of the People, and encreased
the hatred against the Queen Dowager: But some
of the Portugueses being much dissatisfied at these proceedings,
begged the King of Castile,
         some call in the King of Castile. 
          to take upon
him the Crown of Portugal; which he might in all
likelyhood have obtained, if he had been quick enough,
either by fair means or by force, to have put
himself into full possession of the same: But he being
uncertain in his Resolutions, gave by his delays, time
and opportunity to the adverse Party to strengthen it
self. Wherefore, he coming without an Army into
Portugal, his Mother-in-law resigned to him the Government,
but he found but an indifferent Reception
among the Portugueses, they being very averse to him

because he used very rarely to speak or converse with
them: Nevertheless a great many of the Nobility and
some Cities did side with him; but most out of a hatred
to the Castilians, chose for their Leader John the
Bastard, a wise and brave Man, and much beloved by
the People. The Castilians thereupon besieged Lisbon,
but their Army being for the most part destroyed by
the Plague, they were obliged to leave it without having
got any advantage. 1385. In the Year next following,
the Portugueses declared this John their King,John the Bastard. who very
courageously attacked those places, which had declared
for the Castilians, and subdued the greatest part
of them. The Castilians then entred with an Army
into Portugal, but were entirely routed by this new
King near Aliubarotta, which Victory is yearly celebrated
to this day among the Portugueses. After this
Battel, all the rest of the Cities did without more adoe
surrender themselves to the new King. The Portugueses
also calling unto their aid, the Duke of Lancaster,
unto whom they had promised the Crown of
Castile, they entered into that Kingdom with an Army:
But the English having suffered extreamly by
sickness, the Duke of Lancaster thought it most convenient
to conclude a Peace with the Castilians, whereupon
it was agreed, That the son of the King of Castile
should marry his only Daughter Catharine, which he
had by Constantia, Daughter to Pieter King of Castile. 
A Truce was also made betwixt Portugal and
Castile at that time; but the War soon breaking out
again,1399. at last, an everlasting Peace was concluded betwixt
both Kingdoms; so that John had the good fortune
to maintain himself in the possession of the Crown
of Portugal, and reigned with great applause. After
he was quietly settled in the Throne, he undertook an
Expedition into Africa, and took the City Ceuta;
whose son also first found out the Isle of Madera. 
         1415. 
This King died in the Year 1433,1420. and left a Memory
that is to this day dear to the Portugueses. 
        §. 4. Edward. His son Edward was a very Virtuous Prince,
but did not reign long; for at that time, Portugal being
over-run with the Plague, he got the Infection by a

Letter, and died in the Year 1438. During his Reign,
his Brothers undertook a most unfortunate Expedition
into Africa, where being themselves taken Prisoners
before Tangier, they promised to restore to the
Moors Ceuta for a Ransom, leaving Don Ferdinand
as a Hostage behind them. But the states of Portugal
refusing to stand to the Contract, the Hostage was
forced to end his days in Prison. Alfonsus V. 
         Alfonsus, son to this
Edward, was but six years old when his Father died,
whose Tuition was committed, by his Father's last
Will, to his Mother. But the states, refusing to submit
themselves to the Government of a Foreign Woman,
conferred the Administration of the Kingdom on
Don Pedro Duke of Conimbria, Brother to King Edward,
but he received a very slender Recompence for
his services; for being falsely accused before the new
King, he was slain as he was going with some Troops
to the King to justifie himself. Alfonsus V. was else a very
good souldier and a brave Prince, under whose Reign the
Portugueses took several places on the Coast of Africa,
viz. Tangier, Arcilla, Alcassar, and some others. 
Good store of Gold was also transported out of Guinea
into Portugal, which he emploied in coining of
Cruisadoes. After this Alfonsus had great contests
with Ferdinand the Catholick and Isabella, there being
a promise of marriage made betwixt him and Johanna,
the supposed Daughter of Henry IV. King of Castile;
but, as it was reported, begotten in Adultery; but
the Marriage was not consummated, she being Alfonsus's
sister's Daughter, tho', at last, the Pope gave his
Dispensation, which he had refused at first. Alfonsus,
under this pretence, took upon himself the Title and
Arms of Castile, surprising several Cities, assisted by
some of the Nobility of Castile, who sided with him:
Lewis XI. also, King of France, sent him some Auxiliaries,
but these were not sufficient to enable him to
undertake any thing of moment: Wherefore, Ferdinand
retaking all the places from the Portugueses,
routed them also near Toro and near Albuhera;
         1476. so that
Alfonsus despairing of obtaining his Ends,1479. concluded
a Peace with Ferdinand, wherein he renounced both
Castile and the Bride Johanna, she being promised in

marriage to John son of Ferdinand, who was then a
Child: But she, perceiving that this was only done to
elude her,1479. went into a Nunnery. Portugal sustained
considerable losses in this War, and Alfonsus died in the
Year 1481, as it is supposed, out of Grief, because he
had lost the hopes of his Bride and the Crown of Castile. 
         John II. 
Him succeeded his son John II. against whom
a most horrid Conspiracy was discovered, for which
Ferdinand Duke of Braganza, and James Duke of
Visco lost their lives, the latter being killed by the
King's own Hand. This King John was the first,
who found out the way to sail into the East Indies,
         A Project of sailing to the East Indies. 
         
having not only ordered an exact survey to be made
of the African Coast, as far as to the Cape of good hope,
but also sent some by Land into the East Indies, to
inform themselves concerning the Condition of those
Countries. He built also the Castle of Mina on the
Coast of Guinea: But before this intended Voyage to
the East Indies could be begun, this King died in the
Year 1495, leaving no Heirs behind him. §. 5. Emanuel. 
         John II. was succeeded by his Cousin Emanuel,
son of Ferdinand Duke of Visco, Grandchild of King
Edward. With him contended for the succession the
Emperour Maximilian, whose Mother Eleonora was a
Daughter of King Edward: But the Portugueses declared
for Emanuel, who for his extraordinary Qualifications
both of Body and Mind, was extreamly beloved
by them. He, the better to establish himself
at home, married Isabella, eldest Daughter of Ferdinand
the Catholick, out of which marriage a young
Prince was born, whose Name was Michael, who, if
he had lived, would have been Heir to all the spanish
Kingdoms,Moors and Jews banished out of Portugal. 
          except that of Navarre. To please his
Bride, he, by his Proclamation, banished all the Jews
and Moors out of Portugal by a prefixed time, under
penalty, for all such as should stay behind, to be
made slaves for ever. Whereupon the Moors immediately
retired into Africa; but from the Jews they
took their Children which were under the Age of
fourteen, and baptized them against their Will: And
as for the old ones, they were so plagued and vexed

every where, and stopped or hindered in their Journeys,
that most, to be rid of these Vexations, and to avoid
the danger of slavery, were baptized, retaining, nevertheless,
in their Minds, their ancient superstition:
Under the Reign of this King, Portugal arrived to the
highest pitch of its Greatness,The first seavoyage into the East Indies. 
          the design of the East-India
Voyage round Africa, which was projected by
the former King, being now accomplished by Vascus
de Gama,
         1497. who first arrived at Calicut. As soon as
the Portugueses began to draw into their Country
the Trade of spices, they were opposed, especially by
the sultan of Egypt, because formerly these Commodities
used to be conveyed through Egypt to Venice,
and from thence to other parts of Europe, from which
both these Countries drew vast Profit. Wherefore
the Venetians stirred up the sultan,The reason why the Venetians opposed the Portugueses settling themselves there. sending him great
stores of Metal to make Cannons of, and shipwrights to
build ships; by which means they hoped to drive the
Portugueses out of the Indies: But the Portugueses,
who did not much trust the Barbarian Kings of the
Indies, began to build Forts and strong Holds in the
most convenient places; wherein they met with little
opposition, partly because the Indians were terrified
by the vastness of the ships, and the thunder of the
Cannons of the Europeans; partly because they were
not aware of what consequence they might prove one
day against them. The Progress of the Duke •f Albuquerque in the East Indies. 
          The Duke of Albuquerque, especially,
did mightily advance the Power of the Portugueses
in the Indies, who took the Cities of Ormuz,
Malacca, Cochin and Goa; the latter of which is the
place of Residence of the Portuguese Governour in
the Indies. And thus the Portugueses engrossed to
themselves the whole Trade and Commerce of Africa
and the remotest parts of Asia, having possessed themselves
of all the most commodious Ports and Places
not only on the Western side of Africa, in Mauritania,
Guinea, Congo, Angola, in the Isle of st. Thomas,
and some others, but also on the East side, in Manzambique,
Melinde, Mombazo, Zafala, and from the
mouth of the Red sea, as far as Japan; from whence
incredible Riches were conveyed into Portugal. Besides
all this did Pieter Alvanus Capralis, or as some

will have it Americus Vesputius discovered the Country
of Brasile in America,
         The discovery of Brasil in America. 
          whither the Portugueses sent
1500 several Colonies. And under the Reign of this
King Emanuel, who died in the Year 1521, Portugal
increased to that degree, that his Reign was called,
The Golden Age. 
         John III. After him reigned his son John III. 
under whose Reign Portugal continued in the same
flourishing condition. The Jesuites sent to the Indies. 
          This King sent Francis Xavier,
and some other Jesuites into the East Indies, who
were to settle the Christian Religion among the Barbarians. 
The Jesuites commonly boast of great numbers
of Heathens converted by them, but whether
they deserve an intire credit in this, or whether,
perhaps, a great many of these have not rather taken
upon them the Name, than the Faith of Christians,
those are best able to judge, who have been conversant
in those places. He died in the Year 1557. §. 6. sebastian. 
         John III. had for his successour his Grandson
sebastian, a Child of three Years of age, whose Tuition
was committed to the Cardinal Henry, his Uncle,
because his Grandmother was not willing to take upon
her the burthen of the Government. Through the
over-forwardness of this young Prince, Portugal received
such a blow, that it fell from the Pinacle of its
Greatness: For some of his Court Favourites did put
this magnanimous and ambitious Prince, upon such
Enterprizes as were far surpassing both his Age and
Power, and were in no ways suitable to the present
juncture of Affairs, so that his whole Mind was bent
upon Warlike Exploits, and how by Martial Exercises,
to revive the ancient Valour of his subjects, which by
Peace and Plenty, having been more addicted to
Commerce, was of late much decaied. He undertook,
therefore, an Expedition into the next adjacent
parts of Africa, intending, by light skirmishes to try
his Enemies. He proposed, afterwards, a Voyage into
the Indies, but his Council opposing it, it was agreed
upon, that he should undertake an Expedition
into Africa, an occasion presenting it self at that time;
for that Muley Mahomet, King of Morocco, being
banished by his Uncle Muley Malucco, craved the assistance

of King sebastian: Wherefore, notwithstanding
the good Counsels of Philip King of spain,
         His fatal Expedition into Africa. 
          and
others, who dissuaded him from it, he in person,
with a great but unexercised Army entered Africa, and
advancing, against all Reason, too far into the Country,
was obliged, in a disadvantageous place, to fight
against a much more numerous Army; wherefore the
success of the Battel was answerable to the rash attempt;
his Army, wherein was the flower of the Nobility
of Portugal, being miserably routed, and the
souldiers all either cut to pieces or made Prisoners. 
This Battel is famous, because three Kings fell, viz. 
King sebastian, the banished Muley Mahomet, and
Muley Malucco, King of Morocco, who during the
time of the Battel, died of a Fever. This happened
in the Year 1578. Henry. Him succeeded his Uncle Henry
the Cardinal, a very old Man, under whose Reign
there happened nothing worth mentioning, but that
perpetual contests were set on foot concerning the succession. 
Wherefore, he dying in the Year 1580, Philip
II. King of spain, thought it the most efficacious
way, to dispute with the sword in hand; and perceiving
that the Portugueses, out of that hatred which they
bare to the Castilians, were inclined to Anthony son of
Lewis de Beya, natural son to King John III. he sent the
Duke d'Alba with a great Army into Portugal, who
quickly chased away Anthony, and in few days became
Master of the whole Kingdom,Portugal united to spain. all being forced soon to
submit, except the Isle of Tercera, which was not
reduced till after the French, who came to its relief,
were beaten. As the Portugueses did not, without
great reluctancy, bear the Government of the Castilians;
so this Union with Castile proved very prejudicial
to them afterwards. For Philip, who was for bringing
the Netherlanders again under Obedience,
thought that nothing could do it more effectually,
than to stop their Trade and Commerce with spain
and Portugal: For hitherto they had traded no further,
being used to fetch away their Commodities from
thence, and to convey them into the more Northern
parts of Europe. Wherefore Philip concluded, that if
this way of getting Money were once stoped, they

would quickly grow poor, and thereby be obliged to
submit themselves. But this design had a quite contrary
effect;The Dutch sail to the East Indies. 
          for the Hollanders being themselves excluded
from Trade with spain and Portugal, tried, about
the end of the latter Age, to sail to the East Indies. 
And as soon as, after a great many difficulties,
they had once gotten footing there, they greatly impaired
the Portugueses Trade, who hitherto had only
managed the same, and afterwards took from them one
Fort after another. 1620. And the English, with the assistance
of Abbas King of Persia, forced from them the famous
City of Ormutz. 
         1630. Nor was this all, for the Hollanders
took from them a great part of Brasile, and several
places on the Coast of Africa; which the Hollanders,
in all probability, would have had no reason to undertake,
if Portugal had remained a Kingdom by it self,
and had not been annexed to spain. 
        §. 7. But in the Year 1640,The Portuguese shake off the Yoak of spain. 
          the Portugueses took
an occasion to shake off the spanish Yoak. For Philip
IV. then summoned the Portuguese Nobility to assist
him in the War against the Catalonians, who had
rebelled against him. Being therefore armed, and
finding an opportunity to consult with one another,
concerning those Troubles in which spain was involved
at that time; they agreed to withdraw themselves
from the subjection of spain,
         The Duke of Braganz•
           proclaimed King. proclaiming for their
King,John IV. the Duke of Braganza, who stiled himself
John IV. whose Grandmother had stood in competition
with Philip II. for that Crown. The spaniards
committed a gross mistake in this, that they did not
in time secure the Duke, whom they knew to have a
fair pretence to that Crown; to be extreamly beloved
by that Nation, and to be in possession of the
fourth part of the Kingdom. The spaniards being at
that time entangled in Wars against France, Holland
and Catalonia; the Portugueses had thereby good leisure
given them, to settle their Affairs. They made
also a Peace with Holland,
         〈◊〉 League between Portugal and Holland. 
          by virtue of which, both
Parties were to remain in possession of what they had
gotten. But this Peace did not last long; for, these
places which were in the possession of the Hollanders,
         
in Brasile, revolted to the Portugueses, which the Hollanders
looking upon as done by contrivance of the
Portugueses,
         A War breaks cut betwixt them. denounced War against them. And tho'
they did not retake Brasile, yet did they take a great
many other places from them in the East Indies, viz. 
Malacca, the places on the Coast of the Isle of Zeylon,
on the Coast of Cormandel, and on the Coast of
Malabar, Cochin, Canaror, Cranganor, and some others;
and if they had not clapt up a Peace with
them,A Peace in 1661. they would in all likely hood have also driven
them out of Goa it self. John IV. died in the Year
1656,Alfonsus VI. leaving the Kingdom to his son Alfonsus, who
was under Age, but the Administration of the Government
was in the mean time lodged with his
Mother. After the Pyrenean Treaty was concluded,
out of which Portugal was excluded by the spaniards,
it being besides this agreed with France, not to send
any Assistances to the Portugueses, the spaniards fell
upon the Portugueses in good earnest: But these defended
themselves bravely, and notwithstanding the
Articles of the Pyrenean Treaty, the French King did
give leave to the Earl of schombergh, and a great many
other Frenchmen to enter into the service of the
Portugueses, who routed the spaniards in several Encounters,
but more especially, near Extremos and
Villa Vitiosa. 
         1668▪
          At last, the French entering with a great
Army into the Netherlands, the spaniards were willing
to conclude a Peace with the Portugueses, who
were also glad to be once disentangled out of so tedious
a War. By virtue of this Peace spain did resign
all its Pretensions upon Portugal. In the mean time
Alfonsus was grown up a wild and awkward sort of a
Man, as Don Pedro's Friends have represented him to
the World; who, besides this, by a Distemper which
he had in his tender Age, was so disabled both in his
Body and Mind, that he was neither fit to rule nor
marry: Yet he taking from his Mother the Administration
of Affairs upon himself (who quickly after
died) married a Princess of Nemours,
         1666. descended from
the House of savoy; who having lived with him about
sixteen Months, retired into a Monastery, desiring
to be divorced from him: she alledged, That

         Alfonsus was not only incapable of Matrimony, but
also that he had endeavoured, to have one of his Favourites
get her with Child, thereby to secure the
Crown to his Family. There was, besides this, so
strong a Jealousie betwixt the King and his Brother
Don Pedro, that the latter thought his Life to be in
danger, if he did not prevent the Designs of his Brother
and his Favourites: He therefore, bringing the
Nobility and People over to his Party, forced Alfonsus
to surrender to him the Administ••••on of the Kingdom,
reserving for his Maintenance only the yearly
Revenue of 270000 Livers, as also the Palace of Braganza,
with all its Appurtenances. Don Pedro. 
         Don Pedro would
not take upon himself the Title of King, but chose
rather to be called Regent of Portugal, in the name
of his Brother Alfonsus, he being incapable of Administring
the Government: He married also upon the
desire of the Portugueses, and with the Dispensation of
the Pope, his Brother's Wife. And because Alfonsus
should not be in a capacity of raising any disturbances,
he was under a good Guard conducted into the Island
of Ter••ra. But Don Pedro has hitherto administred
the Government in peace, and to the general satisfaction
of the People. §. 8. The Humours of the Portugueses. 
          And to say something concerning the Genius
of the Portugueses, and the strength and the Nature
of the Country. The Portugueses are not inferiour
to the spaniards in Pride and Haughtiness; but
are not esteemed so Prudent and Cautious as these,
but are over-secure in Prosperity, and in time of danger
rash and fool-hardy. Where they get the upperhand
they are very rigorous and cruel. They are
mightily addicted to be Covetous, and love Usury,
and have searched after Money in all corners of the
World. some also will have them to be very Malicious,
which they say is the remnant of the Jewish
Blood, which is intermingled with that of the Portuguese
Nation. This Country, considering its bigness,
is very populous, as is evident by the number of Portugueses,
which have settled themselves in Brasile, on
the Coast of Africa, and in the East Indies: Yet are

they not in a capacity to raise a numerous Land Army
without Foreign help, or to man out a mighty
Fleet of Men of War; but they have enough to do,
to Garrison their frontier Places well, and to keep
Convoys for their Merchant ships. §. 9. Fruitfulness of Portugal. 
          Concerning the Countries which belong nowa-days
to Portugal. The Kingdom of Portugal, by it
self considered, is neither very large nor very fruitfull,
the Inhabitants living most upon such Corn as is imported:
Yet is the Country full of Cities and Towns,
and has a great many commodious sea-ports. The
Commodities of the growth of Portugal, fit for Exportation,
are salt, of which a great quantity is from
setubal or st. Hubes transported into the Northern
Countries: As also Oyl, some Wine, and all sorts of
Fruit. The other Commodities which are brought
from thence they first, have from those Provinces that
belong to them. The silver Mine called Guacaldane,
is said to be of the yearly value of 178 Quentoes of
silver (each Quent being reckoned to amount to 2673
Ducats, 8 Reals, and 26 Marvedoes. ) Among those
Countries that now belong to Portugal the chiefest is
Brasile,
         Brasile, being a long tract of Land in America, extended
all along the sea side, but very narrow, and
famous for the wholsomness of the Air, and its Fertility. 
Here abundance of sugar is made, from whence
arises the main Revenue of the Country, the Portugueses
making use of the same in preserving those excellent
Fruits as grow both in Portugal and Brasile. 
Brasile also affords Ginger, Cotton, Wooll, Indigo
and Wood for the Dyers. But because the Natives of
this Country are naturally lazy, who cannot by any
ways be forced to hard labour, the Portugueses buy
upon the Coast of Africa, and especially in Congo and
Angola, Negroes, whom they use for slaves, buying
and selling them in Brasile as we do Oxen; they are
employed in all sorts of hardships and drudgery. Africa. The
Trade of the Portugueses on the West side of Africa is
not now of any great consequence, since the Hollanders
have interfered with them; and those places
which they are possessed of on the East side of Africa
         
only serve to enrich their Governours. What the Hollanders
have left them in the East Indies is of no small
consequence to them;The East Indies. for Goa is a very large City,
where there is a great Trade among People of all
Nations: But the wiser fort do not approve of the Portuguese
Government in the East Indies; the Portugueses
there are given to Voluptuousness, and neglecting
Military Affairs, are so presumptuous, as to imagine,
that nevertheless with their haughty Carriage they
can out-brave others. Hence it was that the Hollanders
found it so easie to drive this Nation out of the greatest
part of the Indies, which was grown hatefull to
them all: Yet the Portugueses enjoy one Privilege which
the Dutch have not, that they are allowed a free Trade
with China, where they have the City of Macao in an
Island not far distant from the Continent; and they
have understood so to mis-represent the Hollanders
with the Chineses, that they, hitherto, as far as I
know, they have not been able to obtain a free Commerce
with China. 
         A horrible Persecution raised on the Christians of Japan▪
           and the occasion of It. Formerly the Portugueses had a
great Interest in Japan, which was chiefly procured
by means of the Jesuites, who made it their business
to convert the Japoneses to the Christian Religion. It
is related, that above 400000 of them were baptized,
not without hopes, that all the rest would at last have
followed their example. But about thirty years ago,
the Dutch, by their Practices and Artifices, rendered
the Portugueses suspected to the Emperour of Japan,
having intercepted a Letter from the Jesuits to
the Pope, wherein they promised to bring, ere long,
the whole Kingdom of Japan under the Obedience of
the Roman see. The Hollanders interpreted this Letter
in such a sense, as if the Jesuits, with the assistance
of the new Converts, did intend to dethrone the Emperour;
telling him, That the Pope pretended to an
Authority of disposing of Kingdoms at his pleasure,
and that the King of spain who was then Master of
Portugal, was in great esteem with him. The jealous
Japoneses were easily persuaded hereof, when they
considered with what Respect and Kindness the Jesuits
were treated by the new Christians; those being
also very ready to accept of what these good natured

People offered them. And the Governours were sensible,
and complained, that their usual Presents from
the subjects decreased daily, since the new Converts
gave so much to their Priests. The Hollanders also
shewed the Emperour of Japan in a Mapp, how the
Conquests of the King of spain did extend on one
side as far as Manilla, on the other side as far as Macao,
so that by subduing of Japan, he would have an
opportunity of uniting his Conquests. This occasioned
a most horrible Persecution against the Christians,
the Japoneses endeavouring by incredible Torments to
overcome the Constancy of a Nation, which is naturally
one of the most obstinate. Neither did they
cease, till there was not one Christian left in Japan,
and the Portugueses, upon pain of death, were for ever
banished the Country. And the Hollanders, when
afterwards they sent any ships to Japan, used to forbid
their subjects, to shew the least appearance of
Religious Christian Worship, but if they were asked,
Whether they were Christians, to answer, They were
not, but they were Hollanders. Lastly, To Portugal
belong also the Isles called Azores, whereof Tercera,
and the Isle Madera, which are tolerably fruitfull,
are the principal. §. 10. From what hath been said, it is apparent,The strength of Portugal. 
         
that the welfare of Portugal depends chiefly on their
Commerce with the East Indies, Brasile and Africa;
whereby also it is evident enough, that the strength and
Power of Portugal in comparison of the rest of the more
potent states of Europe is not to be esteemed such, as
to be able to attack any of them, or gain any thing
upon them. It is therefore the Interest of this Crown
to take care how to preserve it self in the same condition
as it is in now, and to be very cautious of engaging
it self in a War with any Nation that is potent at sea,
which perhaps might undertake something against
their Provinces abroad. How it stands with regard to spain. 
          But as for its Neighbours in
particular; Portugal is for the most part nearest unto
spain, so that it is easie for the spaniards to enter
Portugal, yet is the Power of spain not very dreadfull
to the Portugueses, partly, because the spaniards cannot

conveniently keep an Army of above 25000 Men
on foot on that side, by reason of the scarcity of Provisions;
the like number the Portugueses also can bring
into the Field; partly, because spain cannot man
out a considerable Fleet of Men of War wherewith
to attack the Portuguese Provinces: Besides, Portugal
in case of such an attack might certainly expect to be
assisted either by the French or English, who as much
as in them lies, will not suffer spain to become again
Master of Portugal. 
         To France. Neither does it appear for the Interest
of Portugal, upon the Instigation of France or
some other Foreign Power, to engage it self without
a pressing necessity in a War with spain, since it is not
probable that it could gain any thing considerable,
but would only weaken it self without the hopes of any
advantage: Portugal has, in all probability, not
much to fear from France, they lying at a considerable
distance from one another; besides this, the Naval
strength of France is not come, as yet, to that height,
as to be in a capacity to be hurtfull to a Nation that
has settled it self very securely in the East and West
Indies; and more especially, since these two Nations
have not any pretensions on each other: And it rather
concerns France that Portugal may stand secure
against spain and Holland. 
         To Holland. The Hollanders have hitherto
proved the most pernicious Enemies to Portugal,
they being in a capacity not only to disturb their
Trade on the Coast of Portugal, but also may prove
very troublesom to them both in the East and West
Indies: And it seems, that it would be no difficult
matter for the Hollanders, by taking from the Portugueses
the City of Macao, on the Coast of China, and
some other places on the Coast of Malabar, quite to
destroy their Trade in the East Indies. But it is probable,
that, in case of a War betwixt the Portugueses
and Hollanders, England would assist the former against
the latter, since it has not been without great
Displeasure to the English, to see what progresses the
Hollanders have made in the East Indies, whereby
they have acquired such vast Riches, that they have
•id defiance to England and all the rest of Europe. 
        CHAP. IV. Of England. §. 1. IN Ancient Time,The ancient sate of England. 
          
         Britainy, which was then esteemed
the biggest Island of the World, was
not ruled by one Prince, but divided into a great many
petty states, each of them governed by its own
King; but this multitude of petty Princes, as it
caused great Divisions among them, so it exposed them
to the danger of being overcome by their Foreign Enemies. 
This Island was scarce known to the Greeks
and Romans till Julius Caesar's time, who, after he
had conquered the greatest part of France, undertook
an Expedition into this Island, hoping, as 'tis supposed,
to meet there with great Booty and Riches. But he
entered not very far into the Country, and after some
skirmishes with the Inhabitants, returned again without
leaving a Garrison, or exacting any Contributions. 
After this Britainy was not attacked again by the Romans,
till under the Reign of the Emperour Claudius,
who bent his Arms against it in good earnest, and
the Inhabitants being divided among themselves, and
not joined in a mutual defence against the common
Enemy,The Romans conquer England. he, without great difficulty, conquered part
of it. At which time Britainy was made a Roman
Province, a constant Army being maintained here by
the Romans, who by degrees conquered one part after
another, yet not without receiving some Defeats. At
last, under the Reign of Domitian, Julius Agricola
marched with his victorious Army through the whole
Island, and giving a signal overthrow to the Caledonians,
who are now called the scots, subdued them;
tho' the Romans could never entirely conquer the utmost
parts of Britainy, being almost inaccessible. 
Wherefore, afterwards the Emperours Adrian and severus,
by building a Wall cross the Island from sea to
sea, divided them from the Roman Province, hoping
thereby to stop their Incursions. But the Romans never
came into Ireland. After the Britains had been

above 400 Years under subjection to the Romans, the
Northern Nations at that time over-running the
Western parts of the Roman Empire, the Romans left
this Island voluntarily, being obliged to recall their
Legions, which were posted in Britainy, to oppose
their Enemies. §. 2. Britainy being thus without an Army,The saxons come into Britainy. 
          and
besides, this, mightily exhausted in its strength, for
that the Romans had made use of their young Men in
their Wars, the Picts and scots, from their barren
Country, made an Inrode into these plentifull Provinces,
destroying all before them. The English, to
make the better Head against them, had chosen one
Vortigern for their King; but he perceiving himself to
be no ways able to resist their Power; and Assistance
being denied him from the Romans, called in the Angles,
a saxon Nation, living then in Holstein: One part
of which retains that Name to this day, tho' some
will have them to have been Frieslanders, others Goths;
it being certain, that the mordern Language of the
Frieslanders has a great affinity with the ancient English
Tongue. These Angles, under their Leaders Hengist
and Horsa, coming with some thousands of Men
to the assistance of the Britains, beat out the scots. 
But they being mightily taken with the Fruitfulness
of the Country,•450. resolved to subdue it, and to lay the
Yoak upon the Britains, who had called them in to
deliver them from it. As soon as the Britains perceived
what their Intention was, they endeavoured to
drive them out of the Island; but these taking up
Arms, and calling in a great many thousands of their
Country-men to their assistance, first took from the
Britains the Eastern parts of the Island. And the
Western parts, which were yet in the possession of the
Britains, being afterwards extreamly wasted by
Plague and Famine, so that the British King Cadwalladar
retired into the lesser Britainy: The saxons
took hold of this opportunity, conquering all the rest
of Britainy, except the Province of Wales, which being
surrounded with Mountains, they were not able to
subdue. This abovementioned Cadwalladar was the

last King of the ancient British Race, who, perceiving
that he was no ways able, any longer, to resist the
Power of the saxons,
         689. retired to Rome, into a Convent. 
But Britainy received the Name of Anglia, or England,
from the Angles. 
        §. 3. These saxons erected seven Kingdoms,The saxon Kings in England. 
          which
however had not their beginning all at one time, but
according as they had taken one part after another
from the Inhabitants: At last they fell together by
the ears among themselves, till one having swallowed
up another, all were united into one Kingdom;
which, how it happened we will briefly relate. The
first Kingdom,The saxon Heptarchy. then, was that of Kent, which began
in the Year 455, and during the Reigns of seventeen
Kings, lasted till the Year 827, when it was subdued
by the West saxons. The second was the Kingdom
of sussex, which began in the Year 488, and, under
five Kings, lasted till the Year 601, when it was likewise
made a Province by the West saxons. The third
was that of the West saxons, which began in the Year
519, and lasted, under nineteen Kings, 561 Years. The
Eleventh of these Kings named Ino,
         Peter's 〈◊〉 did order, That
each subject that was worth ten Pence, should yearly
give one Penny to the Pope of Rome, which Tax was
first called the King's Alms, and afterwards Peter's
Pence. The fourth Kingdom was that of Essex,
which began in the Year 527, and lasted, under fourteen
Kings, till the Year 808, when it was also conquered
by the West saxons. The fifth was that of
Northumberland, which began in the Year 547, and
lasted, under three and twenty Kings, till the Year 926,
when it also was brought under subjection by the West
saxons. The sixth Kingdom was that of the Mercians,
which had its beginning in the Year 522, and
lasted, under twenty Kings, till the Year 724, when
it also fell into the Hands of the West saxons. The seventh
was that of the East Angles, which began in
the Year 575, and lasted, under fifteen Kings, till the
Year 928, when under its King Athelstan it was united
with the rest. But after Egbert, King of the
West saxons, had either subdued the rest, or forced

their Kings to acknowledge him for their supream
Head,The Kingdom of England, 818, he and his successours were henceforward called
no more Kings of the saxons, but of England. Under
his Reign the Danes first entered England,
         Dancs first come into England. 
          as they
continued to do under the following Kings, tho' in
the beginning they were at several times bravely repulsed:
Nevertheless they got footing, at last, in the
Northern parts of England, where they lived for a
while pretty quietly under the Protection of the Kings
of England. But in the time of King Ethelred, who
began his Reign in the Year 979, the Danes made
Inrodes into the southern parts of England, forced
the English to pay them great summs of Money, ravished
their Women, and committed such outrages,
that they got the Name of Lord Danes. And tho'
the English conspired against the Danes,
         1002. and cut them
all off, yet the Danish King returned the next Year,
and made prodigious havock among the English, their
great Preparations which were made against the
Danes, being by the Craft of the Traitor Edrick (notwithstanding
Ethelred had made him Duke of Mercia,
giving him his Daughter for a Wife) rendered ineflectual;
so that Ethelred was obliged to leave his
desolate Kingdom, and to retire into Normandy. sueno,
while he was busie in plundering the Nunnery of
st. Edmund, having been killed by a sword which
no body knew from whence it came, Ethelred returned
out of Normandy into England, and forced Canute,
sueno's son,The Danes driven out, but return again. to retire out of England into Denmark;
but he returned quickly with a much greater
Force, and Ethelred making all imaginable Preparations
against him, died in the Year 1016, whose son
Edmund, sirnamed Ironside, did defend himself with
great Bravery against the Danes, and might have obtained
several Victories over them, if he had not been
therein prevented by that Traitor Edrick. At last it
was agreed, That both Kings should make an end of
the War by a single Combat, in which, tho' Edmund
had the advantage of giving Canute a dangerous
stroke, yet was he persuaded to finish the Combat, by
dividing the Kingdom with the Danes;
         King, Edmund treacherously murthered. and was afterwards,
as he retired privately to ease Nature, treacherously
murthered by Edrick. 
        
§. 4. Canute, the Dane, King of England. After the death of Edmund, Canute called
together the English Lords, and asked them, Whether
at the time, when the Kingdom was divided,
there was any thing mentioned concerning the right
of succession of the Brothers and sons of Edmund;
and the English, out of fear, answering there was not,
he received Homage from them, and was crowned
King of England. 
         1017. After he had rid himself of all that
were left of the Royal Race, he, to curry favour with
the People, married Emma, the Widow of King Ethelred,
sent most of his Danes home, and reigned
with great applause. some of his Parasites, who pretended
to attribute to him something above a Humane
Power, he ridiculed, by causing a Chair to be set near
the sea-side, commanding the seas not to wet his
Feet; but the Tide rolling on the Waves as usually,
he told them, That from thence they might judge of
what extent was the Power of all worldly Kings. He
died in the Year 1035. Harald. His son Harald succeeded, by
reason of his nimbleness sirnamed Harefoot: He did
nothing worth mentioning, but that he caused his
stepmother Emma, and her sons, whom he had,
with fair words, persuaded to come over out of Normandy,
to be miserably murthered. He died in the
Year 1039, leaving no Children behind him. After
his death the great Men of the kingdom called out of
Denmark,
         Hardiknut. 
         Hardiknut his Brother, born of Emma
and Canute, who was famous for nothing but his
greedy Appetite, he being used to keep Table four
times a day. His subjects were so averse to him, that
when he happened to die at a Feast, after he had
reigned but two Years, the English made publick Rejoicings
in the streets, which they called Hocks-tide;
the Danes, after his death, growing so despicable to
the English, that the Danish Government in England
expired, after they had ravaged England for the
space of 240, tho' they possessed the Throne but 26
Years. Edward the Consessor. After the death of Hardiknut, Edward sirnamed
the Confessor, son of King Ethelred and Emma,
Brother of Hardiknut on the Mother's-side, who
had sought sanctuary in Normandy, was called in,
to be king of England: He was crowned in the

Year 1042; and to gain the Affection of the People,
he remitted a Tax called Danegeld, which had been
constantly paid for forty Years last past. He reigned
very peaceably, except, that he was now and then
pestered with the Irish and Danish Pirates, whom, nevertheless,
he quickly overcame. He was the first to
whom was attributed that Virtue, which even to this
day the Kings of England are said to have, to heal by
touching, that Disease which in England is called the
King's Evil. 
         1066. He died without Children. He intended
to have left the Kingdom to his Cousin Edgar Atheling,
Grandson of King Edmund Ironside; but he
being very young, Harald, son of Goodwin Earl of
Kent, who had the Tuition of Edgar, put the Crown
upon his own Head, but did not enjoy it above nine
Months, being slain in a Battel by William Duke of
Normandy, whereby the Crown of England was transferred
to the Norman Family. §. 5. This William,
         W•lliam the Conquerour. sirnamed the Conquerour, was
son of Robert Duke of Normandy, who was descended
from Rollo, a Dane, who about the Year 900, with
a great number of his Country-men and Norwegians,
fell into France, and ravaging the Country without
resistance, Charles the simple, the then King of France,
thought it the best way to set him at quiet, by putting
him into possession of the Province of Neustria,
which afterwards was called Normandy, and giving
to him in Marriage his Daughter Geisa, under condition
that he should become a Christian. Rollo had a
son whose Name was William, sirnamed Long-sword;
whose son was Richard, sirnamed the Hardy; who
was the Father of Richard II. sirnamed the Good, who
was succeeded by his son Richard III. as he was by
his son Richard IV. But he dying without Issue, after
him Robert became Duke of Normandy. This
Robert was Father to William the Conquerour, whom
he had by one Arlotte, a Furrier's Daughter, with
whom, 'tis said, he fell in love, seeing her dance among
other Maids in the Country, and afterwards
married her. And notwithstanding this William was
a Bastard, yet his Father made him his successour,

and got the Nobility to acknowledge him as such
when he was but nine Years of Age, and died soon
after. This William met with great Troubles and
Dangers in his younger Years, which he had the good
fortune to overcome by his Valour, and acquired
thereby great Reputation. Willam conquers England. After the death of Edward
the Confessour, William understanding that Harald
had made himself King, resolved to demand the
Crown of England, as belonging to him by virtue of
the last Will of King Edward, who, he pretended,
had left the same to him, as an acknowledgment for
the great Favours he had received from his Father Robert. 
There are others, who say, That Edward did
only promise this by word of mouth; and that Harald
being then in Normandy, was forced to engage by
Oath, to help him in obtaining the Crown of England. 
It is possible, this was only made use of as a
pretence. But however it be, William landed without
resistance with a great Army, composed of Normans,
French and Netherlanders, whilst the Fleet of
Harald was sailed to the Northern Coast of England, to
oppose his Brother and Harald Harfager King of Norway,
who were entered England on that side, and both
vanquished by him; but thereby he left open the
Door to William to enter into the Kingdom, and
brought his souldiers back much weakened and fatigued
by their great Marches: Yet having reinforced
his Army as well as he could, he offered Battel to William
near Hastings in sussex;
         October 14, which Battel was fought
on both sides with great obstinacy;1066. till Harald being
mortally wounded by an Arrow, the Victory and
Crown of England remained to William; England,
without any further resistance, acknowledging him
for a King. The English were at first extreamly well
satisfied with his Government, he leaving each in possession
of what was his own, and only giving the vacant
Lands to his Normans; partly, also, because he was related
to the former Kings of England, partly, because
he was greatly recommended to them by the Pope. 
He was also very strenuous in securing himself, commanding
all the Arms to be taken from the People,
and to prevent Nocturnal Assemblies and Commotions,

he ordered,The Corfew Bell. That after the Bell had rung at eight
in the Evening, no Fire nor Candle should be seen in
their Houses: Besides this, he built several Forts in
the most commodious places. Notwithstanding all
this,Edgar Atheling makes an attempt. 
          
         Edgar Atheling being with some of the Nobility
retired into scotland, and being assisted by the Danish
Pirates, continually ravaged the Northern Parts of
England, burning the City of York it self, wherein all
the Normans were put to the sword; but he forced
them afterwards thence. There was also a dangerous
Conspiracy set on foot against him, which was happily
suppressed by him, before the Conspirators could join
their Forces. His son Robert Rebels. His son Robert also, endeavoured to
take from him Normandy, against whom his Father
led a great Army out of England, and the Father and
son encountring one another in the Battel, the first
was dismounted by the latter, but he discovering him
to be his Father by his voice, immediately dismounted,
embraced him, and begged his pardon, and was
reconciled to his Father, who freely pardoned all past
Injuries. This King also forced Wales to pay him Tribute,
and King Malcolm of scotland to swear Fealty
to him. But perceiving that this new-conquered
People would not be governed altogether by Mildness,
he began to act more severely,He acts as a Conquerour. taking away out of the
Convents what Gold and silver he could meet with,
of which there was great store conveied thither, as into
sanctuaries. He also imposed heavy Taxes, he appropriated
to himself a great part of the Lands of
England, which he gave unto others, reserving to
himself out of them a yearly Revenue. He took upon
him the Administration of the Goods and Possessions
of all Minors, till they came to the 21st Year of Age,
allowing them only so much as was requisite for their
Maintenance: He revised all their Privileges, introduced
new Laws in the Norman Tongue; whereby a
great many, that did not understand that Language,
fell under severe Penalties: He erected new Courts of
Judicature, and employed great tracts of Ground for
the conveniency of his Hunting. This King introduced
first the use of the long Bow in England, whereby
he had chiefly obtained the Victory against Harald,
         
and whereby afterwards the English did great mischief
to the French, and gained many Battels from them. 
At last, Philip I. King of France, by stirring up his
son Robert against him,Robert Rebels again. endeavouring to raise Disturbances
in Normandy, he went in person over into
Normandy, where the son was quickly reconciled to
the Father. But being obliged to keep his Bed at
Roan, by reason of an Indisposition in his Belly, which
was very gross, the King of France ridiculed him, asking,
How long he intended to lie in; to whom William
sent this Answer, That as soon as he could go to Church
after his lying in, he had vowed to sacrifice a thousand
Candles in France; and he was as good as his word,
for he was no sooner recovered, but he invaded France,
and burnt all where-ever he came: But he having
overheated himself he fell ill and died,1088. leaving by his
last Will, to his eldest son Normandy, but to the second,
called William, the Crown of England. 
        §. 6. William II. sirnamed Rufus, met,William Rufus. at first,
with some Disturbances, occasioned by his Brother
Robert, who pretending to the Crown, was backed by
a great many of the Nobility: but he appeased him,
by promising to pay him yearly, the summ of 3000
Marks, and that he should succeed him after his death. 
But the Nobles, who had dispersed themselves up and
down in the Country, he partly by fair means, partly
by force, reduced to Obedience. This Rebellion
proved very beneficial to the English, the Rebels being
most of them Normans, wherefore the King afterwards
relied more upon the English, as the most
faithfull. He waged War twice with Malcolm King
of scotland, whom he forced in the first to swear him
Fealty, but in the last, he killed both him and his
eldest son. He also subdued the Province of Wales. 
Among other Inventions to get Money one was remarkable;
for he summoned together 20000 Men,
under pretence to go with them into Normandy, but
when they were just agoing to be shipped off, he caused
Proclamation to be made, that every one who was
willing to pay ten shillings, should have leave to stay
at home, unto which every one of them readily consented. 

He was killed by a random shot in hunting. 1100. 
Him succeeded his younger Brother Henry,
         Henry I. who being
present when the King died, seized upon his Treasures,
whereby he procured himself a great many
Friends, so that he was preferred before Robert his
elder Brother, who at that time assisted in the taking
of Jerusalem, which proved no less than the loss of a
Crown to him. For Henry, the better to establish
himself in the Throne, remitted not only several
Taxes, which were laid upon the People by the former
Kings, but also secured unto his Interest the King
of scotland, Edgar, his most dangerous Neighbour,
by marrying his sister Maud. 'Tis reported, that
this Maud had vowed Castity, and that when her Brother
forced her to marry, she wished, that such Children,
as should be born out of this Marriage, might
never prove fortunate; which wish was afterwards
sufficiently fulfilled in her Children, and a great many
of their Posterity. Robert makes a Lesient in England. 
          Notwithstanding this, Robert
landed a great Army in England, but Henry and Robert,
by the mediation of some Friends, and a Promise
of a yearly Pension to be paid to Robert from
Henry, were reconciled, which Pension also afterwards
Robert remitted to Henry. But afterwards repenting
of what he had done, Henry was so exasperated against
him, that he made a Descent in Normandy
with a great Army, and vanquished him in a bloody
Battel, wherein he took him Prisoner. He kept him
not only a Prisoner all his life time,Normandy annexed to the Crown of England. 
          but also, at last,
put his Eyes out, uniting Normandy to the Crown of
England. But King Lewis of France, sirnamed Crassus,
being very jealous of the Greatness of Henry, undertook,
with the assistance of Fulco Earl of Anjou,
and Baldwin Earl of Flanders, to restore unto William,
son of Robert, the Dukedom of Normandy;
whereupon a bloody War ensued, which was at last
composed under this condition, That William, son of
Henry, should swear Fealty to France, for this Dukedom
of Normandy. And it obtained afterwards as a
Custom, That the King's eldest son, was called Duke
of Normandy, as long as this Province was united to
England. The new Duke of Normandy did also marry

the Daughter of the Earl of Anjou: And William,
son of Robert, being then made Earl of Flanders, and
endeavouring a second time to regain Normandy, was
slain in that War. It is related by some, tho' others
contradict it, That this King was the first who admitted
the Commons unto the Grand Council of the
Kingdom, unto which the Nobility and Bishops only
were admitted before it came to be divided into the
Higher and Lower House. His son William, being
by the carelessness of a drunken Master of a ship
drowned at sea, with a great many other persons of
Quality of both sexes, as they were coming back from
Normandy to England, he endeavoured to settle the
Crown upon his Daughter Maud, and her Heirs, she
being at first married to the Emperour, Henry IV. by
whom she had no Children, and afterwards to Geoffrey
Plantagenet, son to Fulk Earl of Anjou. Her Father
made the states of England take Oaths of Fealty to
her in his life time. The Norman Race extinct. He died in the Year 1135, and
with him ended the Male Race of the Norman Royal
Family in England. 
        §. 7. stephen. After the death of Henry, stephen Earl of
Boulogne, Henry's sister's son, did by great Promises
obtain the Crown of England, notwithstanding that
both he and the states had taken the Oaths to acknowledge
Maud for their sovereign, which they endeavoured
by a great many frivolous pretences to
prove to be of no force. The better to establish himself
in the Throne, he gained the Affection of the
states with Presents, and discharged the People of several
Taxes, giving Authority to the Nobility to build fortified
Castles, which afterwards proved very mischievous
to him. He also married his son Eustace to
Constantia, the Daughter of Ludovicus Crassus, King
of France. This King's Reign was overwhelmed with
continual Troubles. For the scots, at first, and afterwards
a great many of his Nobles, trusting in their
strong Castles, raised great Disturbances; yet he
bridled the Insolence of the scots, giving them a signal
overthrow. Maud makes War on him. But his greatest Contest was with the
Empress Maud; for she landing in England was received

by a great many, and King stephen in a Battel
fought near Chester, was taken Prisoner. But she refusing
to restore to the Londoners, King Edward''s
Laws, they sided with her Enemies, and besieged her
very closely in the City of Oxford, from whence she
narrowly escaped; and King stephen also got an opportunity
to get out of Prison. These Troubles continued
till Henry, son of Maud, came to the nineteenth
Year of his age, who, being Lord of four large
Dominions, as having inherited Anjou by his Father's,
Normandy by his Mother's side, Guienne and Poictou by
his Wife Eleonora, Daughter and Heiress of William,
the last Duke of Guienne, he also endeavoured to obtain
the Crown of England; for which purpose he
landed with an Army in England. But he obtained
his End without any great opposition; for Eustace,
King stephen's son dying suddenly, an Agreement
was made betwixt them, whereby stephen adopted
him, and constituted him his Heir and successour,
and died not long after in the Year 1124. Henry
II. Henty II. therefore succeeded him, who, among other
memorable Actions, demolished such fortified Castles
of the Nobility and Bishops, as were built with the
consent of King stephen. After he had reigned near
eighteen Years in Peace and Quietness, he had a mind
to have his son Henry crowned, the better to secure
the succession, he received him as his Copartner in the
Government; but he being married to Margaret, the
Daughter of Lewis the younger King of France, this
proved the cause of great Disturbances afterwards. 
For some persuaded young Henry, That his Father
having abdicated himself from the Government, had
committed thereby the same to his management. 
France envied that a King of England should have
such vast Possessions in France. The scots wished for
nothing more, than to have an opportunity of committing
Depredations in England. Wherefore the
French and scots,
         H•s son, with the French and scots, join in a War against him. joining with young Henry, fell upon
Henry II. all at one time, but were as vigorously
repulsed by him; the scots, especially, suffered the
most in this War, and lost all Huntingtonshire. A
Peace was also concluded with France; Adela, Daughter

of Lewis King of France, being promised in marriage
to Richard, second son of Henry. But the old
King, as 'tis reported, falling in love with her, privately
kept her company, and therefore opposed the
consummation of the marriage betwixt her and his
son Richard. This so exasperated Richard, who, after
the death of his eldest Brother Henry, was now
the next Heir to the Crown, that he made Head against
his Father; and Philip Augustus, King of France,
taking hold of this opportunity, took the City of
Muns. King Henry seeing himself, besides this, deserted
by his Friends,1189. Wife, and Children, died in
few days of Grief. Ireland conquered. 
          This Henry also conquered Ireland,
and united it to England, which he and his successours
governed under the Title of Lords of Ireland, till the
time of Henry VIII. who, after he had withdrawn
himself from the Obedience of the Pope, to nettle
him the more, assumed the Title of King of Ireland;
because the Pope pretends to the sole right to bestow
the Title of King in Christendom, and that none
ought to take it upon him without his consent;
wherefore the Pope, afterwards, to make his Pretence
the more plausible, freely gave the same Title to Mary
Queen of England. Henry also had some differences
with Thomas Backet, Archbishop of Canterbury, who
pretended it was derogatory to the Glory of God,
that the Priests, according to the King's Commands,
should be subject to the Civil Judicatures. There is a
fabulous Relation concerning this Archbishop Thomas,
That he riding a Horse-back, one time, through a
Village, the Country Fellows cut off the Tail of his
Horse, and that their Children, afterwards, were born
with such Tails. §. 8. Richard I. 
         Richard I. who succeeded his Father Henry
in the Kingdom, did, out of a preposterous Zeal, undertake
an Expedition into the Holy Land,
         He makes an Expedition into the Holy Land. 
          with 35000
Men, being accompained by Philip Augustus, King of
France. In this War he took the Island of Cyprus,
which he gave to Guido Lusignanus, who in consideration
thereof resigned his Right to Jerusalem; and
in the Year 1192, he was present at the taking of Ptolemais,
         
where the standard of Duke Leopold of Austria
being set up first, he pulled it down again, putting
his own in the place. But when they were in
great hopes of gaining Jerusalem, Philip returned home
engaging himself by a solemn Oath, that he would
not injure Richard in any of his Dominions. Hugo,
Duke of Burgundy, afterwards followed his example,
which greatly encouraged saladin: And Richard understanding
that the French were fallen into Normandy,
he also made a Peace with saladin; and taking his
way by Land incognito,
         In his return •e is taken Prisoner. was discovered in his Journey
through Austria, where Duke Leopold, remembring
the affront done to him near Ptolemais, took him Prisoner,
and delivered him to the Emperour, who after
fifteen Months Imprisonment, made him pay 100000
Pounds for his Ransom. After his return home, he
found every thing in confusion, the French having
not only ravaged Normandy, and other Provinces belonging
to him, but also his Brother had made a Pretension
to the Crown; but he obliged the latter to
implore his Pardon, and beat the French back into their
own Country. 1199. He died not long after, of a wound
which he received in a siege of some inconsiderable
place in France. 
         John. After his death his Brother John took
upon him the Crown of England,
         His Nephew Arthur opposes him. who was opposed
by Arthur Earl of the lesser Britainy, his elder Brother's
son; who finding himself alone not strong enough,
sought for Aid of the King of France, who
was ready upon all occasions to create Troubles in
England. He took a great many Cities in Normandy
and Anjou. Wherefore King John was obliged to
make a dishonourable Peace with him, giving in marriage,
to Lewis, King Philip's son, Blanch Daughter
of Alfonsus, King of Castile, and of his sister Eleonora,
to whom he gave as a Dowry, all the Cities
which Philip had taken from him, except Angiers. 
Then he married Isabella, Daughter and Heiress of the
Earl of Angoulesme, who was promised before to Hugh
Earl of Marche. He, to revenge this affront, joined
his Forces with the King of France and Prince Arthur
of Britainy, and fell into Touraine and Anjou. But
King John falling upon them unawares, routed the

Enemy, and took Prince Arthur Prisoner, who died
not long after a Prisoner in Roan. But Constantia, the
Mother of Arthur, made her Complaints to Philip
King of France, whose Vassal King John was, on the
score of such Provinces as he was possessed of in France,
and the King of France summoned King John to appear
before him, and to answer for the death of Arthur. 
But he not appearing,The King of France dispossesses him of Normandy. 
          it was declared, that
King John had forfeited what Fiefs he was possessed of
in France, and King Philip took from him Normandy
316 Years after Rollo the Norman had conquered
the same. But the French afterwards attacked also
Angiers, where they were repulsed with great loss by
King John, whereupon a Truce was concluded betwixt
them for two Years: During which time he routed
the scots, and suppressed the Rebels in Ireland and
Wales. The Truce being expired, the War began afresh
with France, and King John's Army being routed,
he made another Truce with France. But this ill
success had much diminished his Authority among his
Nobles, who also hated him, because he had imposed
heavy Taxes upon them; wherefore they, with joint
consent, demanded from him the restitution of their
ancient Privileges; but perceiving that he only intended
to give them fair Words for Deeds,The Dauphin invited by the Barons, invades England. 
          they called to
their aid, Lewis, son of Philip King of France, who
landing with a great Army in England, was received
with a general applause, and whilst King John endeavoured
to make Head against him,1216. he died overwhelmed
with Troubles. §. 9. Henry III. Him succeeded his son Henry III. whose tender
Age wrought Compassion on most, and extinguished
the Hatred which had been conceived against
his Father. And the Earl of Pembroke, to whose
Tuition he was committed, having totally routed the
French near Lincoln, and destroyed the French Forces
at sea,The Dauphin is forced •ome again. that were sent to their assistance, Lewis did renounce
all his Pretensions upon the Crown of England,
and retired into France. This King's Reign was very
long, but also very troublesom, occasioned chiefly by
the great concourse of Foreigners into England; who

crept into all places of profit: For the Pope sent at
one time 300 Italians, who being admitted into Church
Benefices, did so lay about them, that their yearly
Rents amounted to 60000 Marks of silver, which was
a greater Revenue than the Crown had at that time. 
And by reason of the Prodigality of the King, tho'
constantly burthening the People with Taxes, he was
always in great want of Money. He married, besides
this, the Daughter of the Earl of Provence, who having
abundance of poor Kindred, they enriched themselves
out of the Treasury of the King. This caused,
at last,A War with the Barons. an open War betwixt the King and the principal
Men of the Kingdom, in which Henry resigned
to the King of France,
         He quits his Pretensions on Normandy for a summ of Money. all his Pretensions upon Normandy,
Anjou, Poictou, Touraine and Mans, in consideration
of the summ of 300000 pounds paid him
by the French King, and he was himself taken Prisoner
in the first Battel: But his son, Prince Edward,
gathered another Army, and killed the General of
the Rebels, simon of Monfort Earl of Leicester; delivering
thereby his Father, and suppressing the whole
Rebellion. He did nothing worth mentioning abroad,
except that he undertook two Expeditions into France,
both which proved fruitless. He died in the Year 1272. 
Him succeed his son Edward,
         Edward I. who was at that time
in the Holy Land; and tho' he did not come into England
till a Year after his Father's death, yet took
quiet possession of the Crown. This King entirely
united the Principality of Wales to the Crown of England,
the last Prince, Lyonel, being slain in a Battel. 
Under his Reign also began a bloody War, and an
implacable hatred was raised betwixt the English and
scotch Nations, which for 300 Years after caused abundance
of bloodshed betwixt both Nations. The
occasion was thus:The causes of the Differences betwixt the English and scots. 
          After the death of Alexander III. 
King of scotland, who died without Heirs, there
were several that pretended to the Crown of scotland,
wherefore King Edward took upon him the Arbitration
of this matter, that Crown having depended on
his Predecessours, and the scots being still obliged to
do Homage to the King of England. The matter being
examined, it so proved, that John Baliol Earl of

         Galloway, and Robert Bruce, were found to have the
best Title to that Crown. But these two having contested
for the same during the space of six whole
Years, Edward sent under hand to Bruce, telling
him, That he would decide the difference concerning
the Crown of scotland in favour of him, if he would
swear Fealty to England, which Bruce refused, answering,
That he was not so fond of the Crown, as
to purchase the same with the prejudice of the Liberty
of his Native Country. But John Baliol receiving the
same offer, was made King of scotland. There was
about that time a capital Quarrel in scotland, betwixt
the Earl of Fife and the Family of Alberneth, who
had killed the Earl's Brother, and the King of scotland
had by his sentence absolved the latter. The
Earl, therefore, appealed to the English Court, whither
King Baliol was called to appear, and to sit with
the King in Parliament: But as soon as this matter
came under debate, he was admonished to rise from
his seat, and to give an account concerning his sentence. 
He pretended to answer by his Advocate,
which being denied him, he was obliged to answer in
person from the same place, where others used to plead
their Causes: Which both he and the scots resented as
so signal an affront, that, no sooner was he returned
home, but he renounced his Oath to King Edward,
pretending the same to have been unjust, and that it
was not in his power to make such a promise; and
renewing the ancient Aliance with France, he denounced
War against England. 
         A War with scotland. 
          King Edward, therefore
entered scotland with an Army, took the best
strong Holds, and forced the scots and their King to
swear fealty to him; their King he sent a Prisoner into
England, leaving considerable Forces in scotland,
which were, nevertheless, soon after beaten out of
scotland by the scots, under the Conduct of a Gentleman
of a mean Fortune, whose name was William
Wallis. But King Edward soon returned, killed 40000
scots in a Battel near Torkirke, and forced them to
swear Fealty to him a third time. Notwithstanding
all these Oaths, Robert Bruce, who had been John
Baliol's Competitour, took upon him the Crown,

who was several times worsted, but also beat the English
at other times, particularly when King Edward going
with an Army against Robert, in person, fell sick and
died. 1307. This King Edward had also had some Differences
before with France. For some of his subjects in Aquitain,
having done considerable mischief by Privateering
on the Coast of Normandy, King Philip sirnamed
the Handsome summoned Edward to appear at his
Court as his Vassal, and to answer the same, which
Edward refusing to do, he declared all his Possessions
which he held from the Crown of France to be forfeited;
taking from him by force of Arms Bourdeaux
and some other places;With France. against whom Edward entered
into a Confederacy with the Earl of Flanders and the
Emperour Adolphus. But coming into Flanders with
an Army, and finding every thing in confusion and
disorder, he made a Truce with King Philip, promising,
That his son Edward should marry Isabella, Philip's
Daughter. 1297. This King caused, likewise, all the Jews
to be banished out of England,
         He banishes the Jews. 
          not allowing them to
carry away any thing more than what they could carry
themselves. §. 10. Edward II. Him succeeded his son Edward II. who at
the very beginning of his Reign, married Isabella,
Daughter of Philip sirnamed the Handsom, with whom
he had for a Dowry Guienne, and the County of Ponthieu,
the greatest part whereof had been taken from
his Father by the French. 
         Ʋnsuccessfull 〈◊〉 his War with scotland. 
          This King was very unfortunate
in his Wars against the scots, who in the Battel
fought near Bannoksborough, with an Army of 30000
Men defeated 100000 English, which struck such a
terrour among them, that 100 English durst scarce
face three scotchmen: And the English were continually
beaten by the scots (except in Ireland, where
they beat the scots out, who had entered that Kingdom)
so that Edward was at last obliged to make a
Truce with them. 〈…〉 He met also with great Disturbances
at home, the great Men of the Kingdom pressing
him without intermission, to leave to their Mercy,
his Favourites Gaveston, and after him the spencers,
which he refusing to consent to, they fell into open Rebellion,

in which they proving unsuccessfull, several of
the Nobility paid with their lives for it. But the
Queen, pretending that the spencers had diverted the
King's Love from her, retired first into France, and
from thence into Hainault, and returning with an Army,
took the King Prisoner, and caused the spencers
to be executed. The King was carried from place to
place, and greatly abused during his Imprisonment,
having been forced before by the Parliament, to resign
the Kingdom to his son Edward. At last, about six
Months after his Deposition,1327. he was miserably murthered. §. 11. Edward III. 
         Edward III. was very young when the
Crown was conferred upon him, wherefore the Administration
of the Government was, during his Minority
committed to his Mother, and managed under her
chiefly by her Favourite Roger Mortimer. she immediately,
at the beginning, made a dishonourable
Peace with scotland, whereby Edward renounced the
sovereignty and all other Pretensions upon that Kingdom;
and the scots renounced their Title to Cumberland
and Northumberland. This and some other
matters laid to their charge, was the reason why, some
Years after, the Queen was condemned to a perpetual
Imprisonment, and Mortimer was hanged. Afterwards
a most cruel War broke out betwixt England
and France; for Lewis, Philip and Charles, all three
sons of Philip sirnamed the Handsom, dying without
Issue,His Pretensions to the French Crown. 
         Edward did pretend a right to the French
Crown, as being the late King's sister's son; alledging,
That if his Mother, as being a Woman, might
be thought incapable of governing the Realm, the
same ought not to be prejudicial to him, as being a
Man. But Philip de Valois, notwithstanding he was
a degree farther of, as being the late King's Father's
Brother's son, yet prevailed with the states, who under
pretence of the salick Law, and the hatred they
bore to a Foreign sovereign; being, besides this, encouraged
thereunto by the Earl of Artois, set him
upon the Throne. Edward being afterwards summoned
by Philip, to come in person, and to do Homage

for the Dukedom of Aquitain, went thither
in person, he being then but young, and England
full of intestine Commotions, notwithstanding this
seemed to be very prejudicial to his Pretensions: And
King Edward appearing in the Church at Amiens with
the Crown upon his Head, his sword and spurs on, was
ordered to lay them aside, and to take the Oath upon
his Knees; which so exasperated Edward, that
France afterwards felt the effects of it. Not long after,
Edward Baliol, son of John Baliol, made pretensions
to the Crown of scotland against the young
King, being assisted by King Edward, notwithstanding
King David of scotland had married his sister. 
During which Commotions the English recovered Barwick
upon Tweed,
         He is successfull against scotland. 
          and in one Battel killed 30000
scots, whereupon Edward Baliol did do Homage to
the King of England for the Crown of scotland. By
this time King Edward being come to his riper years,His Expedition into France. 
         
upon the instigation of Robert Earl of Artois, undertook
an Expedition into France, and taking upon
him the Title and Arms of France, renewed his Pretensions
to that Crown. In this Expedition he entirely
routed the French Fleet near sluys, which was
sent to hinder his landing,1340. and defeated 30000 Men. 
and after he had besieged Tournay he made a Truce
with them for twelve Months. In the mean while
the English were engaged in a War with the scots,
who, under the Conduct of their former King David,
had driven out Edward Baliol. The time of the Truce
being expired, the War began afresh in France, where,
among other places, the English took Angoulesme. 
King Edward himself came with a great Army into
Normandy, and took, both there and in Picardy, a
great many places from the French: At last a bloody
Battel was fought betwixt them near Crecy in Picardy,
         The Battel near Crecy. 
         
wherein the English, tho' but 30000 strong, fought
against 60000 French, killing 30000 upon the spot,
among whom were 1500 persons of Quality. The
next day after 7000 French were cut to pieces by the
English, who, not knowing what had happened the
day before, were upon their march to the French
Camp. 1346. In this Battel no Quarter was given on either

side. Much about the same time King David of scotland
entered England with an Army of 60000 Men, to
make a Diversion in behalf of France;
         The scotch defeated. but he was defeated
in a great Battel, and himself taken Prisoner. 
The English had no less success the same Year in Britainy
and Guienne. In the Year next following King
Edward took the City of Calais,
         He takes Calais. 
          which he filled with
English Inhabitants. Prince Edward, son to Edward
III. 1356. whom his Father had sent with an Army
into Guienne, behaved himself very valiantly, making
great havock where-ever he came. John King of
France drew out an Army against him of 60000 Men,
tho' the Prince was not above 8000 strong; upon
this the King, thinking he had catched the Bird in the
Net, would not accept of any Conditions, tho' never
so advantageous. But Prince Edward having posted
his Men betwixt the Bushes and Vineyards, from
thence so galled the French Horse with his long Bows,
that they being repulsed, put all the rest in confusion;
King John himself was taken Prisoner, as also his
youngest son, and above 1700 persons of Quality
were slain. The Battel near Poictiers. 
          This Battel was fought about two Leagues
from Poictiers. At last, after King Edward had with
three Armies over-run the greatest part of France, a
Peace was concluded by the Mediation of the Pope, at
Bretaigny,
         A dishonourable Peace to France. 
          not far from Chartres: The Conditions of
this Peace were, That England, besides what it had
before in France, should be put in possession of Poictou,
Zaintogne, Rochelle, Pais d' Aulnis, Angoumois, Perigord,
Limoisin, Quercy, Agenois, and Bigorre, with
an absolute sovereignty over the same; besides this,
the City of Calais, the Counties of Oye, Guisnes, and
Ponthieu, and three Millions of Crowns were to be
given as a Ransom for the King; and that King John
should give his three younger sons, his Brother, and
thirty other persons of Quality as Hostages for the
payment of the said summs. But that on the other
side, the English should restore all the other places
which they had taken from the French, and renounce
their Right and Title to the Crown of France. The
Peace being thus concluded, Prince Edward, to
whom his Father had given the Dukedom of Aquitain,
         
restored Peter King of Castile to his Kingdom. But
in his Journey, the souldiers being very mutinous for
want of Pay, he levyed an extraordinary Tax upon
his subjects, which they complaining of to the King
of France, he summoned the Prince to appear before
him, who answered, He would suddenly appear with
an Army of 60000 Men; therefore Charles V. King
of France,
         Another War with France. 
          denounced War against the English, pretending,
that the promised sovereignty, at the last
Peace, was void, because the Prince had not fulfilled
the Articles of the same, and had committed Hostilities
against France. But whilst Prince Edward was
busie in making great Preparations against France, he
died suddenly, and with him, the English good Fortune;
for the French took from them all the Dukedom
of Aquitain, except Bourdeaux and Bayonne. 
The King was so troubled at the loss both of so brave
a son and his Conquests in France, that he died within
ten Months after his son. 1377. 
        §. 12. Richard II. Him succeeded Richard II. son of that
brave Prince Edward, who being but eleven Years of
Age when he came to the Crown, was despised by the
French, who burnt several places on the English Coast. 
The scots also made an Inrode on the other side of
England, and the War being carried on with various
Fortune,A Peace with France. 
          after several Truces expired, a Peace was at
last concluded. There were also great commotions
in the Kingdom under this King's Reign:Troubles at home. For in
Kent, and other neighbouring Counties, there was an
Insurrection of the Rabble, occasioned by the Insolence
of one of the Receivers of the Poll Tax: This
Rabbles Intention was to have murthered both the
Nobility and Clergy, except the Mendicant Fryars;
but were soon restrained by the King's Valour. But
there were continual Discontents betwixt the King
and the Lords, the King being resolved to rule according
to his Pleasure, and to maintain his Favourites
against the Lords, who were for removing his
Favourites, and bringing his Royal Power into a more
narrow compass by the Authority of the Parliament. 
But it was the King's custom, as soon as the Parliament

was dissolved, to reverse all that was concluded
upon before; yet once the Parliament got him at an
advantage, when it forced him to permit most of
his Favourites to be either killed or banished; and
obliged him by an Oath to promise, That he would
administer the Government according to the Advice
of his Lords. Not long after, a Conspiracy among
the Lords was discovered against him, a great
many of them paid for it with their Heads, the
King seemed at last to have mastered his Enemies;
but he was, nevertheless, ruined at last, which was occasioned
thus:The occasion of his Ruin. 
         Henry Duke of Lancaster accused the
Duke of Norfolk, as if he had spoken ill of the King;
and the latter giving the lye to the former, they challenged
one another, but the Duel was prevented by
the King's Authority, who banished them both out of
the Kingdom. Henry of Lancaster retired into France,
raising there a Faction against the King, by inviting all
dissatisfied persons to him, who promised to set him
on the Throne of England. 
         Henry Duke of Lancaster invades England. He landed but with a few
in England, but at a time, as King Richard's ill Fortune
would have it, when he was in Ireland; and the
Wind proving contrary, he could not have notice of
his Enemies arrival in England till six Weeks after,
which gave them opportunity and leisure to strengthen
their Party. The King also committed a great errour,
for that he afterwards, against his Promise, tarried so
long in Ireland, which was the cause, that such Forces
as were brought together by his Friends, whom
he had sent before, were again dispersed before his arrival
in England. Coming afterwards in person into
England, and being informed how powerfull his Enemies
were, he despaired of his Affairs, and having dismissed
his Forces, that were ready to fight for him till
the last gasp, he was made a Prisoner. Henry of Lancaster
calling, immediately hereupon, a Parliament,
a great many things were objected to Richard, and
he was declared to have forfeited the Crown. But
before this Resolution was published, he resigned himself,
and was not long after miserably murthered in
Prison. 1399. 
        
§. 14. Thus Henry IV. of the House of Lancaster,
         Henry IV. of the House of Lancaster. 
         
came to the Crown, he being after the Deposition
of King Richard declared King by the Parliament,
tho', if the Pretensions of Henry, together
with the Power of the Parliament, be duely examined,
the Title of Henry IV. to the Crown of England,
will be found to have a very ill Foundation. For what
some pretend, that Edmund, from whom the House
of Lancaster descended, was the eldest son of Henry III. 
and that he being very deformed, was obliged to give
way to his Brother Edward I. is rejected as a frivolous
Fable by the English Historians. This King did
labour under great difficulties at the beginning of his
Reign,He had great Difficulties which he surmounted. all which he at last overcame: For the Design
of the French to restore Richard ended with his death. 
And a Conspiracy of some Lords against him was discovered,
even before Richard died. The scots, who made
War on him, got nothing but blows. The Welshmen
also, in hopes of having met with an opportunity to
shake off the English Yoke, joined with a discontented
Party out of England, and rebelled against him; but
before they could join all their Forces, the King came
suddenly upon them, and overthrew them in a great
Battel, wherein, 'tis said, the King killed six and thirty
with his own Hands. Yet the discontented Party
did not rest, but entered into a third Conspiracy against
him, which was soon discovered. A great many
of them retired afterwards into scotland, where they
stirred up the scots against England (for these never
used to miss an opportunity of being troublesome to
England) but they got nothing but blows again for
their pains. This King died in the Year 1413. §. 15. Henry V. After him reigned his son Henry V. who
in his younger Years did not promise much, but after
he came to the Crown, shewed himself one of the
most valiant Kings the English ever had. And as he
was very Aspiring and Ambitious, so he thought he
could not meet with a better opportunity of gaining
Glory, than by entring into a War with France, and
renewing the ancient Pretensions upon that Crown. He
sent, therefore, his Ambassadours to Charles VI. to

lay claim to that Crown, and to make this Proposition
to him, That if he would resign to him the Crown
of France, he would marry his Daughter Catharine. 
But it being not usual that Princes are persuaded to
part with a Crown thus, the next way was to try their
Fortune by Arms. He invades France to prosecute his claim of the Crown. The Battel uear Aguicourt. 
          
         Henry therefore entered France with
an Army, took Harfleur, and obtained afterwards a
most signal Victory near Agincourt in Picardy against
the French, who (according to the English Historians)
were six times stronger than the English. Ten
thousand of the French were killed upon the spot, and
as many taken Prisoners, not above some Hundreds
being slain of the English: Yet at that time Henry did
not pursue his Victory. But not long after, the French
Fleet having first been beaten by the English near Harfleur,
Henry made a second Descent upon France, taking
one place after another in Normandy, and at last
the City of Roan it self: He met with very little opposition
in France at that time,1419. because all was in confusion
at the French Court, the King, Charles VI. being
not in his right Wits, and the Queen being fallen
out with her son, the Dauphin, who had taken from
her all her Jewels and Money, alledging, That they
might be better emploied upon the souldiery: Which
was the reason that the Queen siding with John Duke
of Burgundy, did promote him to the place of chief
Minister of France; who was more intent to maintain
his private Interest and Greatness, against the
Dauphin, than to make Head against the English. A
Congress was proposed to be held betwixt the two
Kings, but this Design was frustrated by the cunning
of the Dauphin, who gave the Duke hopes of an entire
Reconciliation to be made betwixt them both. 
And Monterau being named for the place where they
should meet, the Duke of Burgundy was there,
(questionless, by instigation of the Dauphin) miserably
murthered. For this reason his son, Duke Philip, being
resolved to revenge his Father's death, declared
openly for the English, and by his Mediation obtained,
That King Henry should marry the Princess Catharine,
and during the life of his Wife's Father, administer
the Government in his name, but after his death,

should succeed him in the Throne. The Nuptials
were afterwards celebrated at Troyes in Champaigne. 
         1420. 
After the Treaty had been confirmed by solemn Oaths
on both sides,The Administration of France to be in Henry during Charles's life, and after his death the Crown to descend to him. which was also ratified by the three
Estates assembled in Paris, where the Dauphin was
summoned to appear, to answer concerning the death
of the Duke of Burgundy: But he not appearing,
sentence was given against him, That he should for
ever be banished out of France. There were also
some who designed to make him away, and he was
forced to go from place to place, but his common
place of Residence was Bourges, wherefore they used
to call him, by way of ridiculing, The King of
Bourges. In the mean time the English took one
place after another from him. At last, King Henry
being upon his March to raise the siege of the City of
Cosne on the Loire, which was besieged by the Dauphin,
he fell sick in his Journey thither, and being
carried to Bois de Vicennes, there died in the flower of
his Age and Felicity,1422. leaving the Administration of
France to his Brother, the Duke of Bedford, and the
Administration of England to his second Brother, the
Duke of Gloucester. 
        §. 15. Henry VI. Him succeeded his son Henry VI. a Child of
eight Months old; who, after he was grown up, degenerated
from his Father's Martial Valour, and by
his ill management, lost what his Father had got, eclipsing
thereby the English Glory. He was, after the
death of Charles VI. who died not long after Henry
V. Proclaimed King of France. 
          proclaimed King of France in Paris. In opposition
to him, the Dauphin, Charles VII. also declared
himself King of France, with whom sided the
Bravest among the French, and a great many scots
were sent to his assistance. But Philip Duke of Burgundy,
and John Duke of Britainy, held to the Confederacy
with the English, which was renewed at that
time. And then they began to fall upon one another
with great fury: For the French received a great
Defeat near Crevant in Burgundy,
         1423. and were soundly
beaten near Verneuil. 
         1424. In the Year 1425 the French
had besieged st. Jaques de Beuveron with Forty

thousand Men, the Garrison being reduced to great
extremity, prayed with a loud voice to st. George of
salisbury: The Besiegers hearing the name of salisbury
very frequently among the Besieged, supposed
that the Earl of salisbury was coming to raise the
siege; whereat the French were so terrified that
they run away for fear of his Name. This is certain,
that the English, for a while, were Masters
where-ever they came, but before Orleans the carreer
of their Fortune was first stopt. For, tho, during that
siege, they beat the French, who came to cut off
their Provisions (which Battel is commonly called the
Battel of the Flemmings) and the City would have surrendered
it self to the Duke of Burgundy, which the
English would not accept of; yet did they not only
lose in that siege the brave Earl of salisbury, but
also the French,
         The Maid 〈◊〉 
           Orleans. 
          being encouraged by a Maid called
Joan, that was born in Lorraine, beat the English from
before Orleans. This Maid did several great exploits
against the English, and led, her self in person, King
Charles to his Coronation in Rheims. At last she was
taken Prisoner by the English in an Encounter, who
carried her to Roan, where they burnt her for a Witch. 
But because the English perceived, that after the Coronation
of Charles, a great many Cities sided with him,
they also called over their King Henry out of England,
and crowned him King of France in Paris. 
         He was crowned in Paris. 
          About
the same time, a Truce was concluded by Mediation
of the Pope,1432. for six Years; but it lasted not long, for
the French, during the time of the Truce, possessed
themselves of several places, which they had brought
over to their side by cunning Insinuations, pretending,
That any thing gained without open violence did not
violate the Truce. And King Charles's Maxim was,
Not to fight with the English,The English decline in France. 
          
         but to strive to
get Advantages over them rather by Policy than open
force. But that which gave a great blow to the English,
was, That the Duke of Burgundy having taken a
distaste at the English upon some slight occasion, was
reconciled to King Charles. There were some small
Differences arisen betwixt the Duke of Bedford and
the Duke of Burgundy; to compose which, a meeting

was appointed at st. Omer: But the time being
near at hand, a Dispute arose, which of them should
appear there first; it being supposed, that he who should
come first, did thereby yield the Precedency to the
other; wherefore the Duke of Bedford refused to come
first, alledging, That he being Regent of France,
ought not in that Quality to give preference to a Vassal
of France. But the Duke of Burgundy stood upon
his right of being sovereign of the place where they
were to meet;1435. so that the meeting being set aside, the
Duke of Burgundy broke quite off with the English,
         The Duke of Burgundy leaves the English and is reconciled to Charles. 
         
and afterwards assisted King Charles against them. 
The death of the Duke of Bedford, proved another
Misfortune to the English. For the Duke of somerset
and the Duke of York both pretended to his place; and
tho' the latter did obtain it, yet did the first always
oppose his Designs, so that, before the new Regent
arrived, Paris, which had been seventeen Years in the
possession of the English, and a great many other Cities,
did surrender themselves to King Charles. 
         1436. Yet
did the Duke of Gloucester beat the Duke of Burgundy
before Calais, making great havock in Flanders,
Artois and Hainault; and the brave Talbot did considerable
mischief to the French. 
         The occasion of the Troubles in England. 
          But when afterwards,
by a Truce made with France, the fury of the War
ceased for a little time, there was a Foundation laid
in England for intestine Commotions. The King had
promised marriage to the Daughter of the Earl of Armagnac,
to prevent which, the French King had made
both the Earl and his Daughter Prisoners. The Earl of
suffolk, who was then Ambassadour in France, did propose
thereupon, without having received any Instructions
to that purpose from the King, a Match betwixt the
King and Margaret Daughter of Renè, Duke of Anjou
and King of Naples and sicily, and afterwards persuaded
the King to ratifie the same. This Match was mightily
opposed by the Duke of Gloucester, the King's
Uncle, who alledged, That her Father had only the
bare Titles of King and Duke; and that besides this,
great Injury was done thereby to the first Bride, viz. 
to the Daughter of the Count of Armagnac. Notwithstanding
this, the Match went forward, and to

obtain the Bride of the French, Anjou and Maine were
given them as a Recompence. The King being thus
led away by the Queen and his Favourites, her first
design was to revenge her self upon the Duke of
Gloucester, whom she accused of Male Administration,
and after she had got him committed to Prison,
caused him privately to be murthered. The death of
so innocent a Man did afterwards fall heavy upon the
King: For the French,
         1449. not long after, took from
them all Normandy,
         The English driven out of France. 
          the English, by reason of a Rebellion
in Ireland, not being in a capacity to send
thither speedy and sufficient Relief. They were also
beaten out of Aquitain, so that they had nothing left
them in France, but Calais, and some neighbouring
places; neither could they, afterwards, ever get footing
again in France. 
         The occasion of this sudden loss. This sudden loss was occasioned
by the carelessness of the English Garrisons, that were
not provided with able Governours, as also by the
Pride of the English, whereby they were become
hatefull to the French subjects: But the chief cause
was, Richard Duke of York, who had underhand
raised intestine Commotions in England: For he being
sensible of the King's Weakness, and how ill satisfied
the People were with the Queen's management of Affairs,
hoped, by fomenting and raising Troubles in
the Kingdom, to make way for himself to obtain the
Crown; and this he did, principally, because he pretended
to have the best right to the Crown, being descended,
by his Mother's side, from Lionel Duke of
Clarence, third son of King Edward III. whereas
Henry was descended from John of Gaunt, fourth son
of the said Edward III. but publickly he professed,
That his Intention was only to remove from the King's
Person his pernicious Favourites, and especially the
Duke of somerset. Having therefore got an Army
on foot, he fought with the King's Forces, in which
Battel the Duke of somerset was slain, and the Duke
of York thereupon declared Protector of the King's
Person and the Kingdom. But this Agreement did
not last long, and things came quickly again to an
open War, wherein the Duke of York being worsted,
was forced to fly into Ireland. But not long after

the Earl of Warwick did beat the King's Army, and
taking him Prisoner, the Duke of York was again declared
Protector of the King and Kingdom, and lawfull
Heir of the Crown; under condition that Henry
should retain the Title of King during his life. But
Matters did not remain long in this condition, for the
Queen, who was fled into scotland, marched with a
great Army against the Duke of York, who was killed
in the Battel, and all the Prisoners were executed. 
But his son, in conjunction with the Earl of Warwick,
raised another Army, and marching up to London,
the young Duke of York was there proclaimed
King by the Name of Edward IV. 1460. 
        §. 16. Edward IV. of the House of York. 
          Thus Edward IV. came to the Crown, but
could not maintain it without great difficulty: For
Henry had got together a very powerfull Army in
the North, against whom Edward fought the most
bloody Battel that was ever fought in England,
         A bloody Battel betwixt Edward and Henry. 
          there
being 36796 Men killed upon the spot, because Edward
knowing his Enemies to be superiour in number, had
ordered, not to give Quarter to any of them: After
which Battel Henry retired into scotland, from whence
he returned with another Army, and being again defeated,
with much adoe got safely into scotland. But
returning again incognito into England, he was taken
Prisoner and committed to the Tower. This Prince,
would have made a better Priest than a King of such
a Nation, that was distracted by the Animosities of
several Factions. But the Tragedy did not end here:
The King had sent the Earl of Warwick into France,
to conclude a Match betwixt him and Bona the
Daughter of Lewis Duke of savoy. But the King
having in the mean time suddenly married Elizabeth,
the Widow of John Gray, the Earl was so dissatisfied
at it, that he declared for King Henry; and having
brought over to his Party the Duke of Clarence, the
Brother of King Edward, he fell upon a sudden upon
Edward, and took him Prisoner; but by the carelessness
of his Keepers he escaped not long after. 
And tho' an Agreement was then made betwixt
them, yet was it of no long continuance, for the

Earl of Warwick's Forces were routed, and he forced
to fly into France. As soon as he had recovered himself
a little, he returned into England, where he was
so well received, that he forced King Edward to fly
into the Netherlands to Charles Duke of Burgundy:
And King Henry,
         Henry taken out of Prison and set on the Throne. after he had been nine Years a Prisoner
in the Tower, was again set upon the Throne. 
But Edward having received some Assistance from the
Duke of Burgundy,
         Edward returns into England. 
          returned again into England; but
perceiving that but few came in to him, he made an
Agreement with King Henry, which he confirmed
with a solemn Oath, That he would not undertake any
thing against him, but be contented with his own
Estate: Yet notwithstanding his Oath, he underhand
gathered what Forces he could. The Earl of Warwick
therefore marched towards him, when the Duke
of Clarence, being reconciled to his Brother King Edward,
went over with all his Forces to him. This
gave a signal blow to the Earl of Warwick, who being
now not strong enough to oppose him, was forced
to let him march up to London, where he was joyfully
received by the Londoners, to whom, as 'tis said, he
owed much Money, and was very acceptable to their
Wives;Henry a second time Prisoner 147•, and murthered by the Duke of Gloucester. 
          but King Henry was committed again to the
Tower. Then King Edward attacked the Earl of Warwick,
where a bloody Battel was fought, the Victory
seeming, at first, to incline on the Earl's side: But
some of his Troops, by reason of a thick Fogg, charged
one upon another, which lost him the Battel, he
remaining, with a great many other persons of Quality,
slain in the Field. There happened also this misfortune,
That King Henry's Lady and his son Edward
having got together very considerable Forces in France,
could not come time enough to his assistance, having
been detained by contrary Winds; and coming afterwards
into England, she was taken Prisoner, and her
son killed; and King Henry, also, was murthered by
the Hand of the bloody Duke of Gloucester. England
being thus restored to its Tranquility at home,
Charles, Duke of Burgundy, who was in hopes of getting
an advantage by a War betwixt England and
France, stirred up King Edward against Lewis XI. King of

         France. But King Lewis, who was not ignorant how
mischievous the Confederacy of England and Burgundy
might prove to him, did endeavour to detain the
English King with fair words, and to render the Duke
of Burgundy suspected to him; which had the designed
effect with Edward, who considered with himself,
That Charles Duke of Burgundy having besieged
Nuys, did not send him the promised succours; so that
the Peace was easily concluded, the French having
been very liberal to the English. To confirm this
Peace, King Lewis proposed a Congress to be held betwixt
him and Edward at a certain place, where he,
without making any further difficulty, appeared first
in person, and bestowed a good quantity of Wine upon
the English souldiers, who soon after returned with their
King, who had got but little Honour in this Expedition
into England. But he behaved himself better against
the scots, to whom he did considerable mischief. 
In the mean time the Duke of Gloucester had
rid himself of his elder Brother, the Duke of Clarence,
thereby to advance himself one step nearer to the
Crown. At last King Edward being now resolved
to enter again into a War with France (since King
Lewis made a very slight account of what he had promised
in the last Peace, after he was once rid of his
Enemy) he fell sick, and died in the Year 1483. §. 17. Edward V. After the death of Edward IV. his son Edward
V. a Child of eleven Years of Age was proclaimed
King, but scarce enjoyed this Title ten Weeks. 
For his Uncle Richard, Duke of Gloucester, the most
bloody and wicked Man that ever the World beheld,
immediately made it his business to set the Crown upon
his own Head. Wherefore he first of all secured to
himself the Tuition of the King's and his Brother's
Persons, by making away their most trusty Friends. 
Afterwards, by the help of some Impudent Priests, he
got it spread abroad, That Edward IV. was born in
Adultery, and that consequently the Crown did of right
belong to himself, as being the most like his Father. 
At last, the Duke of Buckingham did insinuate into
the Lord Mayor of London, That the Crown ought to

be offered to Richard; and his Proposal being approved
by the Acclamations of a few Villains set on
for that purpose, it was divulged, That the People
had conferred the Crown upon Richard. 
         Richard III. Having by
these Intrigues obtained the Crown, Richard III. got
himself proclaimed King;1483. and having been crowned,
he caused the innocent King Edward V. Murthers his Nephews. and his Brother,
miserably to be murthered. But soon after his
Coronation a difference arose betwixt him and the
Duke of Buckingham, who had been chiefly instrumental
in helping him to the Crown. He therefore
leaving the Court, began to make a Party against
the King, with an intention, to set the Crown upon
the Head of Henry Earl of Richmond, who was then
an Exile in Britainy. And tho' the Duke of Buckingham's
Plot was discovered, and he beheaded, yet was
not the Design stopt. For the Earl of Richmond set
fail with a great Fleet out of Britainy, but being
driven by contrary Winds on the Coast of Normandy,
he sought Aid of Charles VIII. King of France,
which he readily granted him. A great many English,
also, went over to him, who swore Allegiance
to him, he promising them upon Oath, That he
would marry the Princess Elizabeth, Daughter of Edward
IV. But Henry was within an ace of having
been delivered up to Richard by the Treachery of one
Pieter Landois, Treasurer of the Duke of Britainy,
who had received a great summ of Money from Richard
for undertaking it, for which reason he was afterwards
hanged by his Master's order. Richard also
had an Intention of marrying the Princess Elizabeth,
and therefore had privately made away his former Lady,He murther's his Wife. 
but was obliged to delay the consummation of
the Match, by reason of the approaching danger
from Henry:
         Henry Earl of Richmond invades England. 
          Who to prevent this intended Match,
did in all haste sail out of France, and landing in
Wales, was kindly received by most. Not long after
he gave Battel to Richard, where William stanley,
with some thousands of Men, went over to Henry;
and besides this, a great many of Richard's souldiers
refusing to fight, Richard himself was slain
in the Field, and the Crown being immediately

there put upon Henry's Head, he was proclaimed
King. 1485. 
        §. 18. Henry VII. Hitherto England had been miserably torn
to pieces by the bloody Wars betwixt the Houses of
York and Lancaster, the first whereof bore a White,
the latter a Red Rose in their shields. For Henry IV. 
of the House of Lancaster, had driven Richard II. 
from the Throne; Edward IV. of the House of York,
dethroned again his Grandson Henry VI. And Henry
VII. of the House of Lancaster, took from Edward
the IV th's Brother, Richard III. both his Crown
and Life. He united the White and Red Roses. This King Henry marrying the Daughter
of Edward IV. united the Red and White Roses, and
by his singular Wisdom, did again settle the state of
the Kingdom. Yet was he not altogether free from
Disturbances at home. Lambert symnel. For first of all, one Lambert
symnel, son to a Baker, taking upon him the Name
and Person of Edward Earl of Warwick, caused himself
to be proclaimed King in Ireland. This Comedy
was first invented by a Priest, and encouraged by Margaret,
the Widow of Charles Duke of Burgundy,
sister to Edward IV. who, to spite Henry, gave them
all the Assistance she could. This symnel transported
an Army out of Ireland into England, but was routed
by Henry; and being taken Prisoner, was made a
Turnspit in the King's Kitchin. In the Year 1491
Henry undertook an Expedition against France,
         He makes an Expedition in
           •• 
           France,
          and
besieged Bologne. But the Emperour Maximilian
failing in his promises of giving him Assistance, he in
consideration of a good summ of Money made a Peace
with France. In the mean time, Margaret Dutchess
Dowager of Burgundy, had set up another Impostor,
whose Name was Perkin Warbeck. 
         Perkin Warbeck. He pretended to be
Richard, a younger son of King Edward IV. and
knew so well how to act his part, that he got a considerable
Party in Ireland. From thence he went to
Paris, where he was very well received, France being
then engaged in a War with England: But a Peace
being concluded betwixt them, he retired to the
Dutchess Margaret's Court. From thence he returned
into Ireland, and afterwards came into scotland,
         
where being splendidly received by that King, he was
married to one of his Kinswomen, and entered England
with a confiderable Army. This business might
have proved very dangerous to England, since there
were, at the same time, great Tumults in England,
arisen about some new Taxes. But the Rebels were
beaten, and the scots obliged to retire with great loss
into scotland. The scots made thereupon a Peace
with England, promising, among other things, not to
uphold, by any ways, the Impostor Perkin, who fled
from thence into Ireland, and so came into Cornwall,
where he caused himself to be proclaimed King: But
perceiving that few came over to his side, and the
King's Forces coming upon him, he took sanctuary
in a Church, and surrendered himself to the King, who
committed him a Prisoner to the Tower; but he having
twice made an attempt to escape, was at last
hanged according to his demerits. In the Year 1501,
a Marriage was concluded betwixt James IV. He marries his Daughter Margaret to the King of scotland. 
          King of
scotland, and Margaret the Daughter of Henry, which
afterwards united England and scotland under one
King. Arthur, also, eldest son of Henry, married
Catharine Daughter of Ferdinand the Catholick. But
the Prince dying a few Weeks after the Wedding, in
the sixteenth Year of his Age, and Henry being unwilling
to give back the Dowry, and desirous to maintain
the new Alliance with Ferdinand, married the said
Catharine to his second son Henry, who was then but
twelve Years of Age, having obtained a Dispensation
from Pope Julius II. under pretence that there had been
no carnal knowledge betwixt them; which afterwards
proved the cause of great Alterations. This King is
reckoned among the wisest of his Age, and the only
thing which is reprehended in him, is, That he had a
way, by false Accusations against the rich, to squeeze
out of them great summs of Money from them. He
died in the Year 1509. §. 19. Henry VIII. 
         Henry VIII. immediately upon his first accession
to the Throne, celebrated the Nuptials with
his Brother's Widow, more to fulfill his Father's Will
than out of his own Inclination; yet as long as he

lived with her in Wedlock he governed the Realm very
laudably, and in the Court nothing was seen but
Plays and Diversions. As to his Transactions abroad,
upon the persuasions of Pope Julius II. He enters into League with Ferdinand and the Pope, and Ferdinand
the Catholick, he entered into a Consederacy with
them against France, which Confederacy was pretended
to be made for the defence of the Holy see. 1512. 
         Ferdinand also put him in hopes of recovering Guienne;
wherefore Henry sent an Army into Biscay,
         His Expedition against France. 
          to
fall in conjunction with the spaniards into Guienne. 
But Ferdinand having rather his Eye upon Navarre,
and being negligent in sending timely succours to the
English, they returned home without doing any
thing. A second. In the Year 1513 Henry entered France with
a great Army, where he lost his time in the taking of
Terovane and Tournay, which was wholly destroyed in
spight of all the Attempts of the French to relieve it, tho'
Tournay was redeemed by Francis I. with a good summ
of Money. But at that time Henry did not pursue
his Advantage, partly out of carelessness, incident to
young Men, partly, because he had carried on this
War, not so much for his own Interest, as in favour
of the Pope, and so returned into England. During
the absence of Henry,
         An Invasion of the scots. 
          
         James IV. King of scotland,
upon instigation of the French invaded England, but
received a great overthrow, himself being killed in the
Battel. In the Year next following, Henry perceiving
that his Father-in-law Ferdinand did only impose
upon him, concluded a Peace with France, giving
his sister Mary in marriage to King Lewis XII. In
the Year 1522 Henry again denounced War against
Francis I. He makes a second War against France. 
          and sent considerable Forces into France,
which, nevertheless, both in the same and next following
Year did nothing of moment; and the scots,
on the other side, obtained not any advantages against
the English. But after Francis was taken Prisoner
near Pavia, it seemed that Henry had met with
a fair opportunity to give a great blow to France,
more especially, since he had before prepared a Fleet,
which lay ready to make a Descent in Normandy, yet
he left Charles and made Peace with France. And

         Charles, after he thought he had obtained his aim,
did not make any great account of England, leaving
the Princess Mary, Daughter of Henry, to whom he
had promised Marriage, for the Princess of Portugal,
whom he married. And whereas he used formerly to
write to the King with his own Hand, and subscribe
himself, Your son and trusty Friend; he now caused
his Letters to be writ by his secretary, subscribing only
his Name, Charles. And truly it seemed very necessary
for Henry to keep a little the Ballance. Tho' a great
many are of opinion, That Cardinal Woolsey had a
great hand in this business, who was no great Friend
of Charles V. because he had not promoted him to
the Papal Dignity, and had denied him the Archbishoprick
of Toledo, of which he had put him in hopes
at first; neither did he subscribe himself any more Your
son and Cousin, as he used to do. But however it be,
Henry at that time saved France from an imminent
danger. The Divorce of Henry VIII. 
          After he had lived very peaceably and well
with his Queen for the space of twenty Years, he began
to have a scruple of Conscience, Whether he could
lawfully live in Wedlock with his Brother's Widow;
which scruple he pretended was raised in him first by the
President of Paris, who was sent to treat concerning a
Marriage betwixt Mary Daughter of Henry, and the
second son of Francis. some say, that he being weary
of her, was fallen in love with Anna Bullen, and
found out this way to be rid of her. Yet this seems
not so probable to some, since he did not marry the
said Anna Bullen till three Years after he pretended to
the scruple of Conscience; whereas the heat of Love
does not usually admit of such delays. some will
have it, that Cardinal Woolsey raised this scruple first
in him, on purpose to nettle Charles V. and to please
Francis I. in hopes, after this Divorce, to make up a
Match betwixt Henry and the Dutchess of Alenson, sister
of Francis. But however it be, the business was
brought before the Pope, who gave a Commission to
the Cardinal Campegius, to enquire, in conjunction
with Woolsey, into the matter: 'Tis said, That the
Pope was willing to gratify Henry, and for that purpose
had sent a Bull to Campegius, yet with this

caution, to keep it by him till further order. But
when he afterwards saw Charles V. to prove so successfull,
he durst not venture to do any thing that might
displease him, wherefore he ordered Campegius to burn
the Bull, and to delay the business to the utmost. 
The Queen also refused to answer to their Commission,
but appealed to the Pope in person; besides, Charles V. 
and his Brother Ferdinand had protested against this
Commission. Woolsey did also perceive, that the King
was fallen in love with Anna Bullen, which being
likely to prove prejudicial to his Authority, he persuaded
the Pope underhand, not to give his consent
unto this Divorce. The fall• of Woolsey. 
          
         Henry being informed what Intrigues
the Cardinal was carrying on against him,
humbled the greatness of this haughty Prelate, who
died in the Year next following in great misery. And
Henry being made sensible, that the Pope regarded
more his own Interest than the merits of the Cause,
he forbid, that any body should hence forward appeal
to Rome, or send thither any Money for Church
Benefices. He therefore sent to several Universities in
France and Italy to desire their Opinions in this matter,
who all unanimously agreed in this, That such a
Marriage was against the Laws of God; and having
once more, by his Ambassadours, sollicited the Pope,
but in vain, to decide the matter, the King had the
same adjudged in Parliament, and divorced himself
from her,1532. yet conversed with her in a very friendly
manner ever after till her death, except, that he did
not bed with her since the time when this scruple first
arose. He marries Anna Bullen. some Months after he was married to Anna
Bullen, by whom he had Elizabeth, who was afterwards
Queen. He abrogates the Pope's supremacy. 
         Anno 1535 the King caused himself to
be declared supream Head of the Church of England,
abrogating thereby all the Pope's Authority in that
kingdom, and John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and
Thomas Moor the Lord Chancellour, refusing to acknowledge
him as such, it cost them their Heads. Yet
would Henry never receive the Doctrine of Luther or
Zwinglius, but continued in the Roman Communion,
because he was mightily exasperated against Luther. 
For Henry had formerly got a Book to be published

under his Name against Luther in favour of the Pope,
for which he acquired the Title of Defender of the
Faith, which Title the Kings of England retain to
this day. But Luther setting aside all the Respect
due to a King, writ an Answer to the same, full of
Heat and bitter Reflections. Yet because he esteemed
the Monks as a sort of people that were not only
useless,Monasteries demolished. but also such as depending on the Pope, might
prove very pernicious to him at home, he gave free
leave to all Monks and Nuns to go out of the Convents
and Nunneries; and by degrees converted unto
his own use the Revenues of all Nunneries and Convents,
Colleges and Chappels, as also those of the
Order of the Knights of st. John of Jerusalem; nevertheless
he employed some part of them in erecting six
new Episcopal sees, and Cathedral Churches, and to
the advancing of Learning in the Universities. A
great part also he gave away or sold for a little Money
to great Families, intending thereby to oblige
them for the future to maintain the alterations he had
made. It is reported, that these Church Revenues
which were so reduced, did amount yearly to 186512 l. 
or as some others will have it, to 500752l. He also
abolished the superstitious worship of Images, and
made some other alterations in Religious Worship, so
that, in effect, he laid the Foundation of the Reformation. 
Nevertheless. England was at that time in a
miserable condition;Protestants and Papists executed. for a great many Roman Catholicks,
that would not acknowledge the King for the
supream Head of the English Church were executed:
And a great many more Protestants received the same
punishment, because they would not own the Corporal
presence of the Body of Christ in the sacrament; tho'
this effusion of blood was not so much caused by the
King as by the Bishops, who had first brought in use such
rigorous Laws, and now executed them with as much
severity. War with scotland. 
          In the Year 1543, another War happened
with the scots, who making an Inrode into England
were beaten by a few English; which did grieve King
James V. to that degree, that he died for trouble,
leaving behind him one only Daughter Mary, whom
Henry would have engaged to his son Edward, thereby

by to unite these two Kingdoms; and the business
was like to have succeeded very well, if the Archbishop
of st. Andrews had not opposed it. Henry also
entered into a League with the Emperour against
France,
         He enters into a League with the Emperour against France. 
          wherein it was agreed, to join their Armies of
80000 Foot and 22000 Horse near Paris, to plunder
that City, and to ravage the whole Country as far as
the Loire. But neither of them acted according to
the Agreement, for Henry wasted his time in the siege
and taking of Boulogne, which he afterwards, by the
Peace concluded in the Year 1546, promised to restore
to France within the space of eight Years, in consideration
of the summ of 800000 Crowns to be paid him
for the same; which was performed accordingly under
Edward VI. 1550. Neither do I believe that Henry was
in good earnest by ruining the French to give such
great advantages to Charles V. After his Divorce with
Catharine of Arragon, he was very unfortunate in his
Marriages;Anna Bullen beheaded. 
          for Anna Bullen was beheaded for Adultery
and Incest, tho' some are of opinion, that it was
more the Protestant Religion than the Crime which
proved fatal to her. It is certain, that the Protestant
Princes of Germany did so resent this matter, that
whereas they intended to have made Henry the Head
of their League, they afterwards would hold no correspondency
with him. His other Wives. After Anna Bullen he married
Jane seymour, Mother to Edward VI. who died in
Child-bed. Then he married Anna of Cleves, whom
he also pretending I know not what bodily infirmity
in her, quickly dismissed. The fifth was Catharine
Howard, who was beheaded for Adultery. The sixth
Catharine Parre, Widow of the Lord Latimer, who
outlived him. Henry died in the Year 1547. §. 20. Edward VI. 
         Edward VI. was nine Years of age when
he came to the Crown, during whose Minority his
Uncle, the Duke of somerset had the Administration
of Affairs. His first design was to force the scots to
agree to a Match betwixt Edward and their young
Queen Mary, wherefore he fell into scotland, and
overthrew them near Muskelborough in a great Battel. 
Nevertheless he missed his aim, for the scots sent their

Queen into France, who was there married to the
Dauphin, afterwards King of France by the Name of
Francis II. Under this King Edward the Reformed
Religion was publickly established in England, and
the Mass quite abolished; which occasioned great disturbances
in the Kingdom, which were nevertheless
happily suppressed. In the Year 1550 there was a
Peace concluded betwixt England, France and scotland,
when also Boulogne was restored to the French. 
But King Edward falling sick, the Duke of Northumberland,
who had before destroyed the Duke of somerset,
persuaded King Edward, under pretence of settling
the Protestant Religion, to exclude by his last Will
and Testament his two sisters, Mary and Elizabeth
(for of the Queen of the scots they made but little account
at that time) from the succession of the Crown,
and to settle it upon Jane Grey, Daughter of the Duke
of suffolk, whom he had by Mary Daughter of
Henry VII. which afterwards proved fatal both to
Jane and the Author. For after the death of Edward,
the Duke of Northumberland caused Jane to be proclaimed
Queen in the City of London;
         155•. but Mary eldest
sister of Edward did immediately lay claim to the
Crown in her Letters to the Privy Council:Lady Jane Grey proclaimed Queen. And Letters
proving ineffectual, they began to come to blows;
but most of the Nobility, unto whom Mary promised
not to make any alteration in Religion, did side with
her; and a part of the Army and Fleet, most of the
Privy Counsellors, and the City of London, taking
her part proclaimed her Queen. Northumberland
himself being now willing to go with the tide, did proclaim
Mary Queen in Cambridge, notwithstanding
which he afterwards lost his Head. §. 21. Mary. Queen Mary caused the Roman Catholick
Religion and Mass, which were abolished in her Brother's
time,Restores Popery. as also the Pope's Authority to be restored
in England, she used the Protestants very hardly, of
whom a great many were punished with death, Yet
was she not able to restore the Church Revenues, for
fear of exasperating the greatest Families, who had
them in their possession. The Pope did also send Cardinal

         Poole, to re-unite the Kingdom to the holy see of Rome. 
This Queen Mary was married to Philip son of
Charles V. Marries Philip of spain. who was afterwards King of spain, yet
under these Conditions, That she should have the sole
disposal of all Offices and Revenues of the Kingdom,
and if a son was born, he should, besides the Crown
of England, inherit Burgundy and the Netherlands:
Don Carlos, who was born of a former Wife, should
be Heir of spain and all the Italian Provinces, and in
case he died without Issue, this should also inherit his
part. But no Children came of this marriage, Mary
being pretty well in Years, for she was thirty Years
before proposed in Marriage. And there were some,
who being dissatisfied at this Match, raised Tumults;
among whom was the Duke of suffolk, Father of
Jane,
         Lady Jane, &c. beheaded. 
          who had hitherto been a Prisoner in the Tower,
but she and her Husband Guilford, and her Father,
paid with their Heads for it. It was within an
ace but that Elizabeth, who was afterwards Queen,
had also undergone the same fate, if Philip and the
spaniards had not interceded for her, not out of any
affection to her person,The reason why Philip interceded for the Lady Elizabeth. 
          but because they knew, that
after her, the next Heir to the Crown of England was
Mary Queen of scotland, who being married to the
Dauphin of France, they feared, lest by this means
England and scotland might be united with France. 
Among other Articles in the Marriage Contract of
Queen Mary, it was agreed, That she should not be
obliged to engage her self in the Wars which her Husband,
Philip, should carry on against France: Notwithstanding
which, when Philip afterwards was engaged
in a War with France, she sent to his assistance
some of her best Forces, who by their Bravery chiefly
obtained the Victory near st. Quintin;
         The Battel of st. Quintin. 
          for which reason
Philip gave the City to be plundered by the English. 
Henry II. King of France, taking hold of this
opportunity,Calais lost. 
          assaulted the City of Calais, under the
Command of the Duke de Guise, which being not
well Garrisoned he took in a few days, and obliged all
the Inhabitants to quit the City, and to leave behind
them all their Gold, silver and Jewels. He also
took afterwards the two Castles of Guisnes and

         Hammes, and thereby drove the English quite out
of France. Not long after this loss Queen Mary
died. 1558. 
        §. 22. Elizabeth. 
         Elizabeth, who after the death of her sister,
was unanimously proclaimed Queen, maintained her
Authority, and governed with great Prudence and
Glory in the midst of a great many threatning dangers
to the very end. In the beginning Philip endeavoured
by all means to keep England on his side, for
which reason he proposed a Marriage betwixt Elizabeth
and himself,Philip desires her in marriage. promising to obtain a Dispensation
from the Pope, which was nevertheless opposed by the
French in the Court of Rome. Elizabeth was very
unwilling to disoblige so great a Prince, who had well
deserved of her; yet on the other side, the same
scruple which had caused her Father to be divorced
from Catharine of Arragon, by a parity of reason, did
remain with her; she considered, especially, that the
said Divorce must needs be esteemed unjust, if the
Pope's Dispensation was allowed of; since it had been
alledged as a fundamental reason of the said Divorce,
that the Pope had no power to dispense in any cases
which were contrary to God's Law: she resolved
therefore not to have any further concerns with the
Pope, and to give a friendly refusal to Philip. Then
she, by an Act of Parliament, constituted the Protestant
Episcopacy, yet not at once, but by degrees,
taking away from the Papists the free exercise of their
Religion, and under several Penalties and Fines obliged
every one to frequent the Protestant Churches on
sunday. Every body also was obliged by a solemn
Oath to acknowledge her the supream Governour in
England, even in spiritual Matters; which Oath was
among 9400, who were possessed of Church Benefices,
taken by all, except 189 who refused the same, among
whom were fourteen Bishops. she kept stedfast to
the established Episcopal Church Government, tho'
she met with great opposition from two sorts of people,
viz. 
         Papists and Paritaus. the Papists and Puritans. These having
conceived a great hatred against Episcopacy, and all
other Ceremonies which had the least resemblance

of Popery, were for having every thing regulated according
to the way of Geneva. Tho' their number
increased daily, yet the Queen kept them pretty well
under. But the Papists made several attempts against
her Life and Crown; for her envious Enemies did erect
several seminaries or schools for the English Nation
in foreign Countries;Poreign seminaries. 
         viz. at Douay, at Rheims, at
Rome and Valedolid; all which were erected for the
Instructing of the English Youth in these Principles,
viz. That the Pope had the supream Power over
Kings, and as soon as a King was declared a Heretick
by him, the subjects were thereby absolved from their
Allegiance due to him, and that it was meritorious
work to murther such a King. Out of these schools
Emissaries and Priests were sent into England, whose
business was there to propagate the Roman Catholick
Religion; but more especially, to instruct the People
in the abovementioned Doctrines. To these associated
themselves some Desperado's, who, after Pope Pius V. 
had excommunicated the Queen, were frequently
conspiring against her Life. But most of them got
no other advantage by it, than to make work for the
Hang-man, and occasioned that the Papists were
stricter kept than before. Mary Queen of scotland. 
         Mary also, Queen of scotland,
raised abundance of troubles against Queen Elizabeth;
she being the next Heiress to the Crown of
England, did, with the assistance of the Duke of Guise,
endeavour to have Queen Elizabeth declared by the
Pope Illegitimate (which the spaniards underhand
opposed) and both she and the Dauphin assumed the
Arms of England, which undertaking proved afterwards
fatal to Queen Mary. For Elizabeth sided
with the Earl of Murray, natural Brother of Queen
Mary, whose main endeavour was to chase the French
out of scotland, and to establish there the Protestant
Religion, both which he effected with the assistance of
Queen Elizabeth. This Queen Mary being after the
death of Francis II. returned into scotland, was married
to her Kinsman Henry Darley, one of the handsomest
Men in England, by whom she had James VI. 
But her Love to him grew quickly cold; for a certain
Italian Musician, whose name was David Ritz
         
was so much in favour with the Queen, that a great
many persuaded Henry, that she kept unlawfull company
with him. He being thus animated, with the
assistance of some Gentlemen, pulled David Ritz out
of the Room where he was then waiting upon the
Queen at Table, and killed him immediately. From
whence King James, with whom Queen Mary was then
big with Child, had this natural infirmity, That he could
not see a naked sword, his Mother having at that time
been frighted with naked swords. This so exasperated
the Queen against her Husband, that he soon after,The Queen of scots married Bothwell, who murthered her Husband. as
was supposed, was in the Night time murthered by
George Bothwell, who was afterwards married to the
Queen. The Earl of Murray, with some others, did
publish, That this Murther was committed by the instigation
of the Queen, and George Buchanan, a Creature of
the Earl's, does boldly affirm the same in his Writings. 
Yet there are some, who say, That the Calumnies as
well concerning David Ritz, as also concerning the
death of Henry Darley, were raised against the Queen
by the Artifices of the Earl of Murray, thereby to defame
and dethrone her. But however it be, there
was an Insurrection made against the Queen, and Bothwell,
whom she had married, was forced to fly the
Land (who died in Denmark some Years after in a
miserable condition) and she being made a Prisoner,
made her escape in the Year 1568. But the Forces
which she had gathered being routed,she was made a Prisoner in England. 
          she retired into
England, where she also was made a Prisoner. There
she entered into a Conspiracy against the Queen Elizabeth,
with the Duke of Norfolk, whom she promised
to marry, hoping thereby to obtain the Crown
of England. But the Plot being discovered, the Duke
was made a Prisoner, but was afterwards released. 
And being again discovered to have afresh pursued his
former design,1572. paid for it with his Head. Queen
Mary was confined to a more close Imprisonment. 
several Treaties were set on foot to procure her Liberty,
but no sufficient security could be given to Queen
Elizabeth. Wherefore Queen Mary growing at last
impatient, and being overcome by ill Counsellours,
entered into a Conspiracy with spain, the Pope, and

the Duke of Guise against Elizabeth: Which Plot
having been long carried on privately, did break out
at last,1586. and some Letters of her own hand writing having
been produced among other matters, a Commission
was granted to try the Queen; by vertue of
which she received sentence of Death; which being
confirmed by the Parliament, great application was
made to the Queen for Execution, which Queen Elizabeth
would not grant for a great while, especially,
because her son James and France did make great intercessions
in her behalf. At last the French Ambassadour
d' Aubespine, having suborned a Ru••ian to
murther Queen Elizabeth, her Friends urged vehemently
to hasten the Execution, which she granted,
and signed the Warrant, commanding, nevertheless,
secretary Davidson to keep it by him till farther order:
But he advising thereupon with the Privy Council,
it was ordered, that Execution should be done upon
her immediately. Beheaded, Queen Elizabeth seemed much
concerned there-at,1587. and removed Davidson from his
place. King James also was grievously exasperated,
and some of his Friends advised him to join with spain
and to revenge his Mother's death. But Queen Elizabeth
found a way to appease his Anger, and there
was ever after a very good understanding betwixt
them to the very last. The Duke of Guise and his
party were great Enemies to Queen Elizabeth in
France,
         Queen Elizabeth assists the Huguenots. 
          and she, on the other hand, assisted the Huguenots
with Men and Money, who surrendered into
her Hands as a pledge,1562. 
         Havre de Grace, but her Forces
were obliged to quit the same in the Year next following. 
Neither could she ever get Calais restored to
her,1559. tho' in the Peace concluded at Chasteau en Cambresis,
the same was promised to her. With Henry
the IVth. she lived in a good understanding, sending
frequently to his assistance both Men and Money. 
But with spain she was at variance about the Rebellious
Netherlanders, to whom she not only granted
a safe retreat in her Country and Harbours, but also
assisted them, first underhand, and afterwards openly,
both with Men and Money, they having surrendered
unto her as a pledge, Flushing, Brill and Rammeken:
         
But she would never accept of the sovereignty of the
Netherlands,
         The sovereignty of the Netherlands twice offered her. which being twice offered her, she refused
as often, out of weighty and wise Considerations. 
she sent, however, the Earl of Leicester, her
Favourite, thither as Governour, who did not acquire
much Reputation; but having put things rather
in confusion, he was recalled in the second Year. 
she did also great damage to the spaniards on their
Coasts, and in the West Indies, by sir Francis Drake
and others,1595. and the Earl of Essex took from them
Cadiz; but quitted it immediately after. On the
other side, spain was continually busie in raising
Commotions and Conspiracies against her. And because
the spaniards were of Opinion, That England
might be sooner conquered than the Netherlands, and
that the latter could not be subdued without the
other, they equipped a Fleet which they called the
Invincible Armado, wherewith they intended to invade
England. 
         The Armado defeated. Which Fleet, to the Immortal Glory of
the English Nation being partly destroied by them,
and many miserably torn to pieces by Tempests, did
return home in a very miserable condition. spain also
supported constantly the Rebels in Ireland, who
were very troublesome to Queen Elizabeth, tho' they
were generally beaten by her Forces, except in the
Year 1596, when they soundly beat the English. 
Wherefore the Queen sent thither the Earl of Essex,
who did nothing worth mentioning. And after his
return, the Queen giving him a severe Reprimand,
and ordering him to be kept a Prisoner, he was so
exasperated at it, that tho' he was reconciled to the
Queen, he endeavoured to raise an Insurrection in London,
         Essex heheaded. 
         
which cost him his Head. Tho' the spaniards
were twice repulsed and chased out of Ireland with
considerable loss, yet the Rebellion lasted till the very
end of her life. Neither could a Peace be concluded
betwixt her and the spaniards as long as she lived:
For tho' a Treaty was appointed to be held at Boulogne,
         1600▪
         
by the Mediation of Henry IV. yet the same was
immediately broke off, because the English did dispute
Precedency with the spaniards. This Queen could never
be brought to take a Resolution to marry, tho'

her subjects did greatly desire it, and she had great
Offers made her; amongst whom were, besides Philip,
Charles Archduke of Austria, Eric King of sweden,
the Duke de Anjou, and his Brother the Duke de Alenson,
the Earl of Leicester, &c. It was her custom
not to give a flat denial to such as sued for her in Marriage,
but she used to amuse them with hopes, whereby
she made them her Friends: For she treated with
Charles Archduke of Austria for seven Years together,
and with the Duke of Alenson she was gone so far, as
that the Marriage Contract was made, yet was it so
drawn as that a way was found to annul the same afterwards. 
Under her Reign the English Trade was
first established in Turkey and the East Indies, the finest
Coin, as also the Manufactury of serges and Bays
was settled in England about the same time. This
Queen also brought first into Reputation the English
Naval strength,she was jealous of her Power at sea. which she was so jealous of, that,
tho' she supported the Netherlanders against the spaniards,
yet would she never consent, that the Netherlanders
should so augment their sea Forces, as that thereby
they might be able to contest with England at sea. 
This Maxim, which seemed so necessary for England,
was not regarded by King James, he being a lover of
Peace: And King Charles I. having always his Hands
full with his Rebellious subjects, was not in a capacity
to observe it; wherefore the Dutch Power at sea,
could neither by Cromwel, nor by Charles II. be
brought down again. This most glorious, and by her
subjects, extreamly beloved Queen died in the Year
1602, having before appointed James VI. King of
scotland, for her successour. §. 23. James I. After the death of Elizabeth, James VI. 
King of scotland, was with an unanimous applause
proclaimed King of England. His Title to this Crown
was derived from Margaret Daughter of Henry VII. 
who was married to James IV. King of scotland;
whose son James V. left one only Daughter, who was
Mother of James VI. He at first shewed himself pretty
favourable to the Papists, fearing, lest they might
in the beginning of his Reign raise some Commotions

against him. Cobham's Conspiracy. Notwithstanding which, immediately
after his Coronation the Lord Cobham, Gray, and others,
entered into a Conspiracy against him: Their main design
was to root out the Line of James,
         1603. and to put in
his place the Marchioness d' Arbelle, she being also
descended from the abovesaid Margaret Daughter of
Henry VII. This Lady was after the death of her Father
married to Archibald Douglass, by whom she
had Margaret, who was married to Ma•thias Earl of
Lenox; and this Arbella being the Daughter of Charles
Lenox, the third son of this Earl, was, by the intercession
of spain, to have been married to the Duke of
savoy, and by this means the Popish Religion was again
to be introduced into England: But the whole
Plot being discovered, the Ring-leaders were punished,
yet not with that severity as the hainousness of their
Crime did deserve; tho' in the Year next following,
all the Jesuits and Popish Priests were, by a severe Proclamation,The Powder Plot. 
banished out of England. In the Year
1605, some Popish Villains had hired a Vault under
the Parliament House, which being filled up with a
great many Barrels of Gunpowder, they intended to
have blown the King, the Prince, and the whole Parliament
into the Air. But this devilish Design was
discovered, for one of the Accomplices, by a Letter
that was obscurely written, and delivered by an unknown
person to a Footman of the Lord Mounteagle,
did intreat him not to come the next day into the
Parliament House: Which causing a suspicion in the
King, all the Vaults were searched, and the Powder
found. Hereupon the Parliament made an Act,
That all subjects, by a solemn Oath, should acknowledge
James for their lawfull sovereign; neither,
that the Pope had any Authority to Dethrone sovereigns,
or to absolve subjects from their Allegiance. 
He concluded a Peace with spain,
         1604. and was afterwards
one of the Mediators of the Truce made betwixt
spain and Holland. His son-in-law, the Elector Palatine
being banished out of his Territories, he assisted
only with sending of Ambassadours and proposing of
an Agreement, all which the spaniards rendered ineffectual. 1626. 
His son Prince Charles was sent into spain
         
to marry the Infanta, where the Marriage Contract
was concluded and confirmed by Oath, but the Nuptials
were deferred till the next year, the spaniards
being willing to gain time, and to see how things
would be carried on in Germany for the House of Austria. 
But when, after the Prince's return into England,
the English would needs have the Restitution
of the Elector Palatine inserted in the Articles, the
Match was broke off, and, tho' the Parliament voted
a subsidie to be employed towards the restoring of the
Elector Palatine, yet the Design came to nothing. Under
this King there was a period put to the Differences
and Wars betwixt England and scotland, which hitherto
had created abundance of Troubles to this Island. 
And that nothing of jealousie might remain betwixt
these two Nations about Preference in the Royal Title,
he introduced the Name of Great Britain, which comprehends
both the Kingdoms. There was also set on
foot a Treaty to unite both Kingdoms into one Body,
but it did not succeed, because the scots would not
be Inferiour to the English. Under this King's Reign
Colonies were established in Virginia,
         Foreign Plantations. 
         Bermudos and
Ireland; by which means the English have extended
their Dominions, but there are some, who believe
that this has weakened the English at home, and that
in all probability, it would have been more profitable
for England to have employed those people in Manufactury
and Fishing of Herrings, which produce such
vast Riches to the Dutch in the very sight of the English. 
Yet some are also of Opinion, That it is good for
the publick repose, that the unruly Multitude do not
grow too numerous in England. The East India Trade
was also greatly promoted at that time, but the English
could not come there in competition with the
Dutch, these having been before hand with them. This
King died in the Year 1625. §. 24. His son Charles I. succeeded him,Charles I. who, after
the spanish Match was broke off, married Henrietta
Daughter of Henry IV. 1626. He equipped out a great
Fleet against the spaniards,
         War with spain. the English landed near
Cadiz, but being repulsed with loss, returned without

doing any thing, and all Commerce was prohibited
betwixt spain and England. 
         War with France. 
          He also broke with
France, and because the French Merchants had been
ill treated by the English, all Commerce was also prohibited
betwixt these two Nations. The English thereupon
endeavoured to send Aid unto the City of Rochelle,
and landing in the Isle of Rhee, besieged the Fort of
st. Martin, which being valiantly defended by one
Toyras, the English were repulsed with great loss. In
the Year next following, they undertook to relieve
Rochelle, but in vain. A Peace concluded with both. Whereupon Charles concluded
a Peace with France in the Year 1629, and in the
Year next following with spain, having by this
War, waged against these two Nations, which were
not so easie to be attacked by one at the same time,
gained no Reputation to the dissatisfied subjects, and
vast Debts. Under this King arose very violent Divisions
betwixt him and the Parliament, which produced
a most strange Revolution in that Kingdom. It
will be very well worth our while,Causes of the intestine Commotions in England. 
          to enquire a little
more narrowly into the true causes thereof. That
wife Queen, Elizabeth, held it for a constant maxim,
to oppose the growing power of spain with all her
might, whereby she weakened spain, and not only enriched
her subjects, but also exercised them in sea
Affairs, wherein consists the chief strength and security
of this Kingdom: Wherefore she always kept a
good Correspondency with all such as were Enemies
of the House of Austria; she assisted France against
the Designs of the spaniards, favoured the Protestant
Princes in Germany, upheld the Dutch against the spaniards,
thereby the better to weaken so formidable a
Neighbour, looking upon the Netherlands as the
Out-work of her Kingdom. Besides this, she finding
continual employment for her subjects abroad, did
not a little contribute towards the preserving the
Health of the state; for by this means a great deal of
corrupt and inflamed Blood being taken away,The different Conduct of Queen Elizabeth and King James as to the state. it prevented
intestine Diseases in the state. But King James
took quite another course, and perceiving that the Ʋnited
Provinces were grown strongh enough, not only to
support themselves against spain, but also to dispute

the Dominion of the Narrow seas with England, he
left them to themselves, and concluding a Peace with
spain, established a lasting Tranquility at home, for
his Inclinations were more for Books than Arms. And
because subjects in general are apt to follow the Inclinations
of their sovereigns, the People laid aside all
Warlike Exercises, and fell into such Weaknesses and
Vices, as are commonly the product of Plenty and
Peace: And the King hoped, when these Nations applyed
themselves only to Trade and Commerce, they
would be diverted from having any thoughts of opposing
his Authority. He made it also his main endeavour
to unite the Minds of the scots and English, by Naturalizing
the English in scotland, and the scots in England,
and by joining the great Families by Marriages:
But he was more especially carefull of establishing one
Form of Religious Worship in both Kingdoms. The Occasions that were taken from Religion. For
tho' there was no great difference in the Articles of
Faith, yet the Ceremonies and Church Government
were very different. For Queen Elizabeth, when she
established the Protestant Religion retained many Ceremonies,
which were anciently used in the Primitive
Church, as also used by the Papists afterwards; she
maintained also the Authority of the Bishops, yet under
the Royal Power; supposing that this Constitution
was most suitable to a Monarchy, considering that
the Bishops had some dependence on the King, and
had their Votes in Parliament. And it used to be the
saying of King James, No Bishop, no King. But this
Constitution did not agree with those of the Reformed
Religion in Holland, switzerland and France, partly
because these Nations were used to a Democratical Liberty,
and therefore loved an Equality in the Church-Government
as well as the state; partly because they
had suffered from some Kings and Bishops, and therefore
both were equally hated by them. These would
not allow of any superiority among the Clergy, but
constituted the outward Church-Government by Presbyteries,
Classes and synods; neither would they admit
any Ceremonies, believing, that the perfection of
the Reformed Religion did consist in not having so
much as anything, tho'never so indifferent, common

with the Papists. And according to this Form the
Church of scotland being established, the number of
such as were of the same Opinion increased daily in
England, who were commonly called Presbyterians
or Puritans. And the Capriciousness of those who
were of several sentiments proved the more dangerous,
because these Nations being of a melancholy
temper used to adhere stedfastly to their Opinions,
not to be removed from them. King James being
besides a great Enemy of the Puritans, thought to
have found out a way to suppress them in scotland,
by inserting it among the Royal Prerogatives, which
was to be confirmed by the Parliament of scotland,
That he had the supream Power both in spiritual and
Temporal Affairs in the same manner in scotland as
in England. By this means he hoped to model,
without any great difficulty, the Church of scotland
according to that of England. And tho' this Proposition
was opposed by a great many in the Parliament
of scotland, yet the King's party prevailed, and a
new Form of Church-Government was established in
scotland. But the King had no sooner turned his
back and was returned into England, but the common
people made an Insurrection against the Bishops in
scotland, who began to introduce there the Ceremonies
of the Church of England. 
        §. 25. The Conduct of Charles I. 
          Tho' King Charles I. was of a more warlike
temper than his Father, yet was he obliged, tho'
against his Will, according to the Maxims of his Father,
to preserve Peace abroad, to avoid the danger of
being obliged to depend on the Capricious Humours
of his subjects. And because he, as well as his Father,
had a great dislike of the Power of the common
people, and of the Temper and Principles of the Puritans,
all his Thoughts were bent to find out ways
how to secure himself from the danger of both: And
because the King could not impose any extraordinary
Taxes without the consent of the Parliament, Charles
chose rather to controul his own Inclinations, which
were bent for War, than to fawn upon the Parliament;
in hopes that its Heats, which was for limiting

the King's Power, would by degrees diminish, if it
was not called together for a considerable time. It is
supposed, that the Lord Treasurer Weston did confirm
him in this Opinion, who did expect to be called to
an account by the Parliament. The Parliament used
anciently to provide a certain yearly Revenue for the
King, towards maintaining his Court and Fleet, to
secure the Commerce of the Kingdom, which Revenue
was not hereditary to the next successour. The
first Parliament which was called by Charles I. had settled
the Customs, as part of his Revenue, but when he
afterwards, having dissolved the same against the Opinion
of the Male Contents, his Revenues also began to be
called in question, it being their Opinion, that nothing
could so soon oblige the King to call a new Parliament, as
if what was necessary for his and the Courts subsistence,
were withheld from him. But the King, however, did
not only receive the same Customs as his Predecessours
had done, but also augmented them with new Impositions
to the yearly value of 800000l. by which
means the King, who was firm in his Opinion, was
thought to have a Design to alter the ancient Constitution
of the Government, and to maintain himself
without a Parliament; which however was looked
upon as an impossibility by the generality of them:
For King James had left above 1200000l. Debts,
which were since increased by Charles 400000l. more,
which Money was expended in the Wars against
France and spain; it was therefore not visible, how
he could extricate himself out of these Debts without
the assistance of a Parliament, since according to the
fundamental Constitutions of the Realm he could not
levy any Taxes upon the subjects, and to force them
to pay any, was beyond his Power, having no Forces
on foot, but the Militia of the Kingdom. And it
was impossible to bring in such a Foreign Force, as
could be supposed to be able to make Head against
the dissatisfied people. Notwithstanding all which
the King pursued his Resolution, and having asked
the Opinion of Men skilled in the Law, who told him,
That it was allowable, for the publick benefit, to levy
Money by his own Authority; he imposed several new

Taxes, whereby he augmented his yearly Revenue
from 500000l. to 800000l. Besides this, he laid a Tax
for maintaining of a Fleet, which amounted to 200000l. 
All which caused great dissatisfaction among the subjects
against the King: Besides, the King was thought
by the Puritans, to deal hardly with them and too mildly
with the Papists (by the Counsel of Archbishop
Laud, a Man of great Resolution, who at that time apprehended,
that Faction very dangerous both to Church
and state which was by the Puritans interpreted, as if
the King was resolved, by suppressing of them, to introduce
Popery; to insinuate this into the Multitude,
abundance of Libels and scurrilous Papers were scattered
abroad against the King and the Bishops, and Commissioners
being appointed to inquire into them, they
were rather exasperated than appeased by its severity. §. 26. Both Nations being therefore full of Discontents,Troubles in scotland and England. 
         
the Flame first broke out in scotland: For
the King endeavouring to root out Puritanism there,
to establish the Authority of the Bishops, and an Uniformity
in Religion, he ordered a Church Liturgy to
be composed, abrogating all Presbyteries, Classes and
Provincial synods, and enjoining every one under severe
penalties, to conform to the same; there was a
general Insurrection raised by that party in scotland. 
There was also another reason;1637. for, at the time of the
first Reformation the Revenues of a great many
Church Benefices were appropriated to the use of the
Crown, but without any remarkable advantage; for
they were lett out, for the most part, to younger
Brothers of Noble Families. These having found the
benefit of them, had, by getting from time to time
the survivorship, continued the same in their Families,
and kept them as their own Propriety. Nay,
they did more than this, for during the Minority of
King James VI. 1567. they had obtained the Titles of Lordships
for some of the most considerable of these, or
some lesser Benefices joined together. King James afterwards
perceiving,1617. that thereby they had bound him
up from rewarding such with these Benefices as deserved
well of him, would have recalled the beforesaid

Grants, but met with such opposition in the Nobility,
that he desisted from it. 1633. But the King undertook the
business effectually, employing the said Revenues towards
the augmenting of the salaries of the Clergy. 
These therefore who had been losers by this Revocation
joined with such Ministers as were mortal Enemies
of the Liturgy, did, with all their might, help to
stirr up the Rebellion. Alexander Lesley, also, who
had been a Commander in the German Wars, and having
refused to serve under John Banniers there, was
returned into his native Country, in hopes to make
his advantage of these Troubles. He put himself at
the Head of the Rebellious Party, and by persuading
the Nobility, that the King intended to take away
their ancient Privileges, stirred up a great many against
the King. And to make a fair shew to the
common people, they made use of the Religious Cloak
of Conscience,The scotch Covenant. ordering a Directory to be composed
by the Ministers quite opposite to the former Liturgy. 
They thereupon entered into an Association▪ confirmed
by solemn Oaths, That they would maintain the
same against all, even the King himself: This Association
was called the Covenant, which being subscribed
by the greatest part of the Nobility and Clergy, a
Council was constituted, unto whom was committed
the supream direction of their Affairs. To suppress
these Commotions, the King sent the Marquiss of Hamilton
into scotland, who dealing mildly with them,
only encouraged the adverse party: For the King calling
a Parliament in hopes to remedy these Disorders,
the Covenant was by its Authority confirmed, the Episcopal
Authority quite abolished, and Puritanism established
in defiance of the Royal Authority. There
being then no other way left to reduce the Rebellious
Party to Obedience but force, and the King being in
want both of Money and a sufficient number of faithfull
subjects, he was forced to make some use of the
Papists to obtain both, wherefore he did not only raise
an Army, wherein were some Papists, but also was
assisted by them with some summs of Money, all
which, however, was in no ways sufficient to supply
the want of the King; and a supply being demanded

from the subjects, very few, except the King's servants
and Officers were for contributing any thing. 
And it being divulged, that a great many thousand of
Irish Papists and Germans were ready for the King's
service, to try, whether by this way the subjects
could be frightened out of some Money, it served only
to exasperate the Minds of the people. Yet the King's
Forces might in all probability have been successfull against
the scots, if they had fallen upon them immediately. 
But because they had leisure given them,
they did not only settle a Correspondency with France
and Holland, from whence they were supplied with
Money and Ammunition; but also sent their Deputies
into England, who so well knew there to represent
the state of their Affairs, that the King being
persuaded by the English, made a dishonourable Agreement
with them: Which nevertheless did not last
long, the Court being ashamed of the Agreement,
and the scots not trusting the King,A Letter intercepted, wherein the scots desire succour from France. 
          the King had
in the mean while intercepted a Letter, wherein the
scots had sollicited for some Officers and Money to be
sent them from France; this he hoped might prove
an inducement to the English to oppose the Treachery
of the scots, and to furnish him with some supplies,
of which he stood in great need at that time. He
calling therefore a Parliament,The Parliament is sactious, and favours the scots. 
          the Letter was read,
but to no great purpose, the Members of the House of
Commons being most of them Puritans, who were
great friends of the scots, so that the Parliament was
a little while after dissolved by the King's Authority. 
The King had caused to be made Prisoner in London
the scotch Commissioner, who had subscribed the abovementioned
Letter, whereupon the scots took up
Arms, and took the Castle of Edinburgh. The
King having with great difficulty, for want of Money,
got together an Army, went in person against the
scots, but as a party of his Army endeavouring to
force their passage was beaten back with loss, which
augmented the Discontents of his subjects, the
souldiers for want of Pay, being to be maintained by
those Counties where they were quartered. Besides
this, ten thousand Men, which were raised by the

Parliament in Ireland for the King's service, were
forced to be disbanded for want to Pay. There was
then no other remedy left but to make a Truce with
the scots, and to call a new Parliament in England,
which began to sit in November in the Year 1640. §. 27. But in the session of this Parliament,The Parliament of England directly oppose the King. the
Ulcer which had been long gathering in the Minds of
the people broke out: For the Parliament, in lieu of
assisting the King against the scots, entered into a Confederacy
with them, promising a monthly subsidy towards
the maintaining of the scottish Army, which
was to be ready at the English Parliament's command. 
Then they began to reform the states, to clip the
King's Authority, to punish his Ministers and servants,
and to take away the Bishops, Liturgy, and
fall upon Papists. The better to obtain their aim,
they forced the King to consent, that he would not
dissolve the Parliament, till all such as were criminal
were punished, and the state were entirely reformed:
In a word, that they should have the liberty to sit as
long as they pleased. Which in effect put an end to
the Royal Authority. To try the King's Patience,
and their own strength, they brought, the Earl of
strafford, Lord Deputy of Ireland, to his Tryal, who,
notwithstanding he made a good Defence, and the
King did his utmost to preserve his beloved and faithfull
Minister, yet the Rabble of London, then encouraged
by the House of Commons, making an Insurrection,
he received sentence of Death in the House
of Lords. And the King refusing to sign the Warrant
for his Execution, was obliged thereunto, partly
by the importunity of the Parliament, partly by the
Insurrection of the Rabble of the City of London, and
partly by a Letter from the Earl, desiring him to do
it. Then the rest of the King's Ministers went to
rack, some of them saving themselves by flight, some
being imprisoned. The Bishops were excluded from
the House of Lords. The star-chamber, the Authority
of the Privy Council, and the High Commission
were suppressed: the Customs and power over the Fleet
were taken away from the King. some of these and

some other things, which proved very prejudicial to
him, the King was forced to grant them, in hopes
thereby to heal the ulcerated Minds of the people. 
He went also in person into scotland, where he granted
them all what they could desire. About the same
time a horrid Conspiracy broke out among the Irish
Papists, who pretended to maintain the Popish Religion,
and to redress some Grievances by force of Arms,
which occasioned afterwards a most cruel slaughter. At
last it came to an open Rebellion:1642. For the Parliament
not ceasing to encroach daily more and more upon the
Royal Authority,The Rebellion begins. the King resolved to assert his Authority;
wherefore he summoned five Members of Parliament,
whom he accused as Traitors, and authors of all the
Differences: And the House of Commons taking their
part, the King went into the House accompanied with
some Officers, and spoke to them with a due resentment
of their Behaviour,Their Behaviours which however they made
but little account of, being not ignorant of his want of
Power, of which he seemed to betray himself, when he
immediately afterwards condescended and came nearer
their Expectations. The House of Commons thereupon
stirred up the neighbouring Counties, and especially the
London Apprentices, who made such an Insurrection,
that the King, not thinking himself safe in London, retired
into the Country. And the Parliament ordered all
the Governours of the sea-ports, not to obey the King's
Commands. It was certainly a great errour in the
King, that in such troublesome times, he had not taken
care to secure to himself the sea-ports, by which
means he might have hoped for some assistance from
abroad: For, when the King intended to possess himself
of the Fort and Harbour of Hull, he was not admitted;
so that there was nothing left, but that the
Parliament had not as yet taken from the King
the disposal of Offices. But for the rest it was evident,
that their Intention was, to abolish totally the
Royal Power, and to introduce a Democracy. And
after the King had once given his Assent to the exclusion
of the Bishops from the House of Lords, where
they had six and twenty votes, and the rest of the
King's Friends had once absented themselves from both

Houses, it was easie for the remainder quite to abolish
the Authority of the House of Lords. Thus, after
there had been long contests by Words and Writings
betwixt both parties, the King now as well as the Parliament
began to Arm themselves: And the King having
at several times, at first, beat the Parliament Forces,
the Parliament stirred up the scots, entring with them
into a Confederacy. Whereupon the scots came with a
considerable Force to the assistance of the Parliament,
which turned the scale, the King's Forces being routed
near York, and he obliged, for want of Men and
Money, to give himself up to the protection of the
scots,
         The King made a Prisoner. who nevertheless did surrender him to the English
for the summ of 400000l. under condition that
he should not be abused by them. The King was afterwards
carried a Prisoner from place to place for a
considerable time. §. 28. By these means the Puritans or Presbyterians,The Independents become Masters. 
had, under the pretext of Religion, overthrown
the Royal Power: But that they could not long enjoy
their usurped power, was occasioned by a certain
sect that called themselves Independent, because they
would not depend on any certain from of Faith, or
spiritual, or Temporal Constitutions, nor acknowledge
any of the same, whereby they opened a door
for all sorts of Fanaticks, to come under their Protection. 
These, under pretence of a particular holy
Zeal, had not only got a great sway in the Parliament,
and had been against any peaceable accommodation,
proposed by others; but also by their cunning
insinuating way crept into the chief Civil and Military
Employments: For in the place of the Earl of
Essex, Thomas Fairfax was made General, and Oliver
Cromwell Lieutenant General over the Army, the last
of which was the Head of the Independents, a sly and
cunning Fox. And out of this party all vacant places
were supplied in Parliament. The Presbyterians therefore
perceiving that the Independents began to be very
strong in the House, and that most Military Employments
were in their Hands, proposed in the House,
That one part of the Army should be sent into Ireland,
         
that some Forces only should be kept in England,
and the rest be disbanded. Cromwell made use of this
to stirr up the souldiers, telling them, that they were
likely to be disbanded without pay, or else to be
starved in Ireland. Thereupon the souldiers entered
into an Association among themselves, taking upon
them not only the Military, but also all the Civil
Power, they took the King from the Parliament into
their own custody, pretending they would give him
his liberty, but made themselves Masters of the City
of London, and acted in every thing at discretion. For
they quickly after broke off the Treaty with the King,
and a great many of the subjects, who were not able
to bear their Tyranny, taking up Arms were dispersed
by Cromwell, who also beat the scots that were come into
England to the assistance of the King, making their
General Hamilton a Prisoner. But during the absence of
Cromwell, the Parliament had re-assumed the Treaty
with the King, and the business was carried on so far,
that there was no small hopes of an Accommodation,
when the souldiers, headed by Ireton, son-in-law to
Cromwell, broke off the Treaty, taking Prisoners such
Members of the House as did oppose them: so that
there were not above forty Members left in the Parliament,
and those were either Officers, or at least, favourers
of the Army. These decreed, That no Treaty
should be set on foot for the future with the King;
That the supream Power was to be lodged in the People,
which was represented by the House of Commons;
But the Regal Power, and the Authority of the House of
Lords should be quite abolished. Then they ordered a
Court of 250 persons to be erected,The King is sentenced to death and executed. by whose Authority
the King was to be summoned, sentenced and
punished, notwithstanding that the generality of the
people looked upon this Court as an abominable thing,
some Presbyterian Ministers cried out aloud against it
in the Pulpits; the scots protested against it, and the
Dutch Ambassadours, and other Princes did their utmost
to oppose it. Before this Court, where sat among
the rest, a great many of very mean Extraction,
the King was accused of High Treason, Tyranny, and
of all the Murthers and Robberies committed since

the beginning of these Troubles. And the King, as
in justice he ought to do, refusing to acknowledge its
Authority, was sentenced to be beheaded, tho' there
were but 67 of these pretended Judges present, the rest
abominating the fact, had absented themselves, among
whom was Fairfax. But the King, having
been miserably abused by the souldiers, was beheaded
with an Ax upon a scaffold erected for that purpose
before Whitehall. 
         1648. 
        §. 29. Ireland conq•ered. 
          After the death of the King the outward
shew of the supream Power was in the Parliament,
but in effect it was lodged in the Generals of the Armies. 
Their first design was to banish the King's son
and the whole Royal Family, and to suppress all such
as adhered to him. Cromwell was sent into Ireland,
where the Royal Party was as yet pretty strong, which
Island was reduced in the space of one year by Cromwell's
good Fortune and Valour. In the mean while the scots
had proclaimed Charles II. tho' under very hard Conditions,
their King, who also arriving there safely out of
France, whither he was gone for shelter, was crowned
King of scotland. The Parliament thereupon recalled
Cromwell out of Ireland, and having made him
General (for they had deposed Fairfax whom they
mistrusted) sent him into scotland, where he beat the
scots several times, but especially gave them an entire
defeat near Leith, taking, among other places, the
Castle of Edinborough, which was hitherto esteemed
impregnable. The King, in the mean while, having
gathered a flying Army entered England, in hopes
that a great many English would join with him: But
he was deceived in his hopes, very few coming to him,
and Cromwell overtaking him with his Army near
Worcester,
         Charles II. r••ted. 
          his Forces were routed and dispersed; so
that he was forced to change his Cloaths in his flight,
and after a great many dangers was miraculously saved,
and escaped, by the help of a Merchant-ship, into
France. The King being thus driven out of the
Island, the scots were entirely subdued under the Conduct
of General Monk, who was sent thither by
Cromwell, who having imposed upon them very hard

Conditions,The scots c•nquered. according to their deserts, intirely subjected
them to the English. This done, the Parliament
began to take into consideration, how to disband
part of the Army, and to quarter the rest in the
several Counties. But Cromwell sent away that Parliament,
which had been the cause of so much troubles,
and constituted a new Parliament, consisting of 144
Members, most of them being Fanaticks and Enthusiasts;
among whom Cromwell had put a few cunning
Fellows, who being entirely devoted to his service,
did make the rest dance after his pipe. These
having first let these silly wretches go on in their own
way, till by their phantastical Behaviour they had
made themselves ridiculous and hated by every body,
then offered the supream Administration of Affairs to
Cromwell;
         Cromwell made Protectour. who having accepted of the same under
the Title of a Protectour, selected a Privy Council,
wherein were received the Heads of the several sects. 
Thus they who had shown so much aversion to the
Royal Power, and hatched out a Monarch of their
own, who, without controul, ruled the three Kingdoms
of England, scotland and Ireland at pleasure. 
Cromwell, to have a fair pretence to keep on foot his
sea and Land Forces, which were the Foundation of
his Power,1652. began a War with the Dutch, who seemed
to despise this new Monarch: But Fortune was so favourable
to Cromwell in this War, that he took above
1700 Merchant men from the Dutch, and beat them in
five sea Engagements, in the last of which the Dutch
lost Martin Tromp, and twenty seven Men of War. 
The Hollanders then were obliged to beg for Peace,
and to accept of such Conditions as were proposed to
them; among which, one was, That the Province of
Holland should exclude the Prince of Orange for ever,
from succeeding in his Father's place. Another was,
That they should not receive the banished King Charles II. 
into their Territories. Which some alledge as a reason,
that he was always ready afterwards to revenge
himself upon them,1660. tho' at his return into the Kingdom,
they endeavoured with aboundance of flattery to
make amends for the former affront. It is very likely
also, that the King was suspicious, that the Dutch
         
had fomented the Differences betwixt his Father and
the Parliament. Cromwell acquired so much Glory by
this War, that most Princes sent their Ambassadours
to him as if he had been a lawfull sovereign, and desired
his Friendship. He was no less fortunate in discovering
several Plots which were made against him:
For which purpose he entertained his spies every
where, even near the King's person; having besides
this, a cunning way to draw the people over to his
party, and to suppress such as envied his Fortune
He sent also a Fleet into the Mediterranea•, wherewith
he curbed the Pirates on the Coast of Barbary. 
Another was sent into the West Indies, where his Designs
against st. Domingo and Hispaniola miscarried,
but Jamaica he took from the spaniards, notwithstanding
that a great many of his Men were taken off
by sickness; and he did considerable mischief to the
spaniards by ruining their silver Fleet. He sent some
Auxiliary Troops to the French in Flanders, who, in
recompence, surrendered to him Dunkirk. He died
in the Year 1658, having been as great and formidable
as ever any King of England. He was a great
Master in the Art of Dissimulation, knowing how to
make his advantage of Religious Pretences; wherefore
he gave liberty of Conscience to all sectaries,
whereby he not only got their Favours, but also by dividing
the people into several Opinions, he prevented
their easily joining against him. §. 30. King Charles II's Restauration. After the death of Cromwell this unlawfull
and violent form of Government could not be of a
long continuance: For tho' his son Richard succeeded
him in the Protectorship (this was the Title used by
Cromwell, having refused the Name of King) yet was
he in no ways capable to bear such a weight. Wherefore
he was soon deposed by the Parliament, which
being divided within it self, Monk, who was then Governour
of scotland, took this opportunity, and marching
with an Army out of scotland into England, possessed
himself of the City of London, dissolved the Military
Parliament, and recalled King Charles II. into
his Kingdom. 1660. This King did restore the ancient Form

of Government in the Kingdom both in spiritual and
Temporal Matters, for his subjects were ready to gratify
him in most respects, as having been taught by
Experience, That the Frogs who despised to have a
Block for their King, got afterwards a stork for their
Master. This King, who judged, that the Greatness
of England did chiefly depend on the Dominion of
the seas and Commerce, which was disputed by no
body but the Dutch, did, in all probability, bend all his
Thoughts that way, viz. How to make these proud
Merchants more pliable, his hopes being grounded upon
what he had seen Cromwell do against them. 
Wherefore he began a War with Holland,
         War with Holland, 1665. which was
carried on at first with equal losses on both sides: But
the English at last taking a Resolution to tire out the
Dutch without coming to an Engagement, they ventured
at a bold stroke, and to the great dishonour of
the English, entered the River of Thames, firing some
ships at Chattam. This obliged the King to make a Peace
with them by the Mediation of swedeland, tho' the great
success of the French Arms in Flanders may probably
have contributed a great deal towards it. Yet it seems
as if ever since he had kept up a Resolution of Revenging
himself upon them, he being also again exasperated
by the Rable in Holland, who affronted him
afterwards. He therefore in the Year 1672 attacked
the Dutch at sea, whilst the King of France made
War against them by Land. But this War did not
succeed according to his expectation; for the Dutch
did not only take from the English a great number of
Merchant-ships, but also the English could not master
the Dutch in any of these sea fights, partly, because
the French would not fall on in good earnest, partly,
because the Dutch acted very circumspectly, not giving
any opportunity to the English to make a Descent
either on Holland or Zealand. It is possible that
the King's Intentions may perhaps have been frustrated
by some Intrigues at home. And because the English
Nation began to grow very jealous of the great
successes of France, the King was obliged to make a
separate Peace with Holland,
         1674. and afterwards was received
as a Mediatour betwixt the Parties then engaged in
War against one another. 
§. 31. Constitution of the English Nation. The English Nation is very populous and
fruitfull: There are some who have reckoned, that in
England are 9913 Parishes, in each Parish 80 Families,
which make 778183 Families, and seven persons
reckoned to each Family amounts to 6470800 souls,
among which number it may be supposed to be above a
Million of Men capable of bearing of Arms. This Nation
is also very fit to settle Colonies in Foreign Countries,
because the English, as soon as they are in the
least settled in a place, they quickly marry, and remain
there for their life time. Whereas other Nations,
if they go into far distant Countries, go only with an
intent to get a little Money, which they afterwards
love to spend in their Native Country. The English
are also Courageous, Brave, not fearing Death. For in
former times their Land forces were much superiour to
the French, and ever since the times of Queen Elizabeth,
when they first began to apply themselves in earnest
to the sea, they have not been inferiour in skill
and Courage to any Nation in the World, except that
the Dutch may be compared with them in sea Affairs. 
But this is to be observed of the English Valour, that
they commonly are very Furious and Brave at the beginning,
yet great Hardship, Famine, and other Inconveniencies
they are not so well able to endure with
Patience, as being used to live in great Ease and Plenty
in their own Country. Wherefore Maurice Prince
of Orange used to put the English, that were sent
to his assistance, upon desperate Enterprizes, before
(as he used to say) they had digested the English Beef. 
They are also very dexterous in Woollen and silk Manufacturies,
and are generally great Improvers of
other Arts and Mysteries: Yet they are also somewhat
Highminded, inclining themselves to Diversion,
which is the reason that they do not so much
Work as otherwise they might; and yet they expect
to be paid for their idle Hours as well as the
rest, which is the reason why they sell their Wares
at a higher rate than others, and that they envy
such French Handycrafts-men, who live among
them, and are seldom diverted from their daily Labour
by any Pleasures. They being generally of

a melancholy temper, makes them very Ingenious,
and when they apply▪ themselevs to any science,
they make great progress in the same, if they hit
the right way. But by the same rule, because there
happens often to be an ill mixture of this melancholy
temper, abundance of Fanaticks and Enthusiasts
are to be found among them, who having formed
to themselves Opinions out of ill-grounded Principles,
adhere so stedfast to them, that they are not by any
ways to be removed from them. Wherefore there is
not any Nation under the sun, where more different
and more absurd Opinions are to be met withall in
Religion than in England. The loose sort of people
are addicted to Thieving and Robbing upon the
High-way, wherefore the Hangmen are always busie
in England. This Nation also loves to eat and drink
extreamly well; tho' there are some who will have it,
that the English have got their way of drinking so plentifully
from the Netherlanders in the Wars of the Low-Countries,
and from thence have brought that ill
Custom over into England, which before, they say,
was not in use there. Their own Histories are sufficient
evidences, that they have been always inclined to
Rebellion and intestine Commotions. Wherefore
their Kings can never be secure, except they keep a
watchfull Eye over the restless spirit of the People. §. 32. Constitution of the scotch Nation. The scots are reported to have a share
of Pride and Envy in them. They are very apt to
propose to themselves great Matters, and to delight
in their own Inventions. They are good Land-souldiers,
and can endure more hardship than the English,
neither are they so much addicted to their Belly, both
which they have from the barrenness of their Native
Country. They are very Revengefull, and intestine
Broils among the Noble Families were formerly very
common among them: For it was a custom, that
each Family used to select one for the Head of the
Family, unto whom they almost paid more respect
than to the King himself, and if any one of the Family
had received an Injury, he made complaint
thereof to the Head of his Family: And if the Head

of the same Family did resolve to revenge the Injury,
the whole Family, under the Conduct of their Head,
fell upon the Family of the Aggressour with Fire and
sword. Which abominable Custom King James VI. 
did endeavour to abolish. Besides this, they are easily
stirred up to Rebellion, very obstinate in defending
their Opinions to the utmost. Their fruitfulness in
Children makes them seek other Countries, since their
Country can scarce maintain them all at home. There
is another reason also to be given for this, which is the
right of the First-born, whereby the eldest son is Heir
of all the real Estate of his Father, the rest of the Brothers
being obliged to be satisfied with their share in
the Personal Estate. These then being obliged to advance
themselves as well as they can, apply themselves
either to the Wars or study: Wherefore most
Ministers in scotland are said to be younger Brothers
of good Families. But in England it is no shame for
the younger Brothers of such Families to be Merchants. 
In former times, before scotland and England
were united under one King, the scottish souldiers
were in great esteem, because the French made
constantly use of them in their Wars, and at home
they were always picquering with the English: But
afterwards they grew careless of Warlike Exercises,
and especially when Cromwell subdued them, their ancient
Glory was quite obscured. The scots are also often
very Ingenious, and well versed in the Latin
Tongue. And at that time, when all Liberal sciences
were suppressed in Europe by a long Barbarism, the same
were kept up in scotland, which did furnish several other
Nations with Learned Men, who instructed them
in these sciences. But as the scots, which live in the
low Countries, on the south-side, are well civilized, so
those who inhabit the Mountains, who are called
Highlanders, as also the Inhabitants of the Orkney
and Western Islands, are very raw and uncivilized. §. 33. Of the Irish. 
          The Irish are commonly esteemed to be a
fool-hardy and ill sort of people; very lazy, yet pretty
hard in undergoing the Fatigues of War. They
are very obstinate, and never to be bent from their Opinion. 

After Ireland was conquered by King Henry II. 
abundance of English settled themselves in that Kingdom,
whose numbers increased from time to time to
that degree, that scarce the fourth part of the Island
remaine in the possession of the ancient Inhabitants. 
And because most of the Irish adhere to the Popish Religion,
they did not only rebel under Queen Elizabeth,
but also under the Reign of King Charles I. entered into
a most horrid Conspiracy against the English living
among them, of whom, 'tis said, they murthered
200000 within the space of six Months: But when the
English had recollected themselves, they again killed
about 100000 of them. Cromwell had once a mind
to have rooted out the whole Nation, as being quite
incorrigible and past hopes of any amendment. Wherefore
he sent some thousands to the King of spain, under
condition, that none of them should return into
the English Dominions. He used also to plague them
every way, so that they are become a miserable Nation. §. 34. The Condition of Great Brittainy. 
          Concerning those Countries which belong
to the King of England, the Kingdom of England is a
Rich and Fertile Country, abounding in every thing,
either for the Necessity or Pleasures of Mankind, except
Oyl and Wine, and such other Commodities as
do not grow in the other parts of Europe, are of the
growth of that Country. But else they have great
numbers of very fine Horses, and good Cattle, especially
the best sheep of all Europe, which make the best
part of the native Riches of England, bearing so good
a sort of Wooll, that an incredible quantity of the
best Cloath is made in England, and from thence every
Year transported into Foreign Parts. These sheep
feed in great Flocks in the Country without as much
as a shepherd, there being no Wolves to be met withal
in England; the reason of which, as 'tis reported, is,
that King Edgar, about the Year 940, did order a certain
number of Wolves to be paid by the Prince of
Wales to him as a yearly Tribute, by which means the
Wolves were quite destroied in England: Tho' it is also
very probable, that the great English Mastiffs have

been very instrumental in this point, it being certain,
that for Fierceness and strength they surpass all the
rest in the World. A great quantity also of Lead, but
especially of the finest Tin is to be found in England,
which surpasses in goodness all others in that kind. 
The sea also is very profitable to the English, since it
produces a great quantity of Fish, which are daily
catched by the Inhabitants. Tho' by the Negligence
and Laziness of the ancient English, who did not apply
themselves industriously to Fishing, they have lost
a great part of that advantage: But the Netherlanders,
from ancient times, have made use of this advantage,
and got vast Riches by the Fishery of Herrings
and Cods, giving only a small Gratuity to the
English, in case they have occasion to dry their Nets
on their shores; tho' oftentimes the English, envying
the Netherlanders, will force them to pay more than
ordinary, which has several times served as a pretext
for a War betwixt both Nations. Besides this, the
sea is extreamly advantageous to England, for thereby
the English being separated from their Neighbouring
Nations, cannot easily be attacked; whereas
they may easily invade others: And because this
Island is situated almost in the very middle of Europe,
in a narrow sea, where all ships which either go
East or Westward must pass by; and having, besides
this, a very deep Coast and commodious Harbour, it
lies most convenient for Commerce and Trade, which
the English carry on in most parts of the World, and
the Dutch hitherto have been the only obstacle that
they are not become Masters of the whole Trade of
the World. For it proves very disadvantageous to
the English, that they love to eat and drink well, and
that in great quantity, and by reason of their love of
Ease, they are •ain to employ double the number of
seamen in their ships, of what the Dutch do; and besides
this, they will not be contented with a small gain:
Whereas the Dutch live very sparingly, do not refuse
the Penny, and therefore are easier to be dealt withall
than the English. They import a great deal of raw
silk into England, which being wrought in the Country,
mightily encreases their Riches. In the same

manner they do with their Woollen Manufactury
now, whereas before the times of Henry VIII. they
used to transport most of their Wooll into the Netherlands,
where it was wrought, and turned to the great
advantage of those Cities. But this King perceiving that
his own subjects might as well make the same benefit of
it, he set up the Woollen Manufactury in his Kingdom,
which increased prodigiously, afterwards, when at the
time of the Troubles in the Netherlands, a great many
of these Weavers did settle themselves in England. The
Riches of England also are, as it seems, not a little increased,
because it is not permitted there to any Body to
carry any Gold or silver of their own Coin out of the
Land, except it be perhaps to the value of ten pound
sterling for a Traveller. But scotland does not come near
England, neither in Fertility nor Riches, having not
any Commodities fit for Exportation, except salt-fish,
salt, Lead and Coals. The Western and Orkney
Islands also produce nothing but Fish. Ireland abounds
in Cattel, and especially in sheep, tho' the Irish Wooll
is not so fine as the English, but for the rest it is a fertile
and plentifull Country. In America belong to the
English Crown, the Islands of Bermudos, Virginia and
New England, and some of the Caribby Islands, whither
the English have sent their Colonies, and have also
begun to settle themselves on the Continent of Guiana. 
The Product of these Countries is chiefly Tobacco,
sugar, Ginger, Indigo and Cotton. They have
also a Colony in the Island of Jamaica, from whence
the English Buckaneers and Privateers do great mischief
to the spanish West Indies. For it is a custom
with the English, That tho' they are at Peace with the
spaniards in Europe, they do them, nevertheless, all the
Mischief they can in the West Indies. Tangier King
Charles II. got as a Dowry with the Infanta of Portugal. 
Lastly, The English also are possessed of some places
in the Banda Islands, and thereabouts in the East
Indies, which are of no small consequence to them. §. 35. The Form of the Government in England. 
          The Constitution of the Government in
England is chiefly remarkable for this, that the King
cannot act at pleasure, but in some Matters is to take

the Advice of the Parliament. By this Name is to be
understood the Assembly of the Estates of England,
which is divided into the Higher and the Lower House. 
In the first sit the Bishops and the Lords, in the latter
the Deputies of the Cities, and of the 52 Counties
or shires, into which the whole Kingdom of England
is divided. The first origin of the Parliament, as
'tis related, was this, That the former Kings of England
did grant great Privileges to the Lords, by whose
assistance they had conquered the Country, and kept
the common people in obedience. But these in conjunction
with the Bishops growing too head-strong,
proved very troublesome, especially to King John and
Henry III. wherefore, to suppress their Insolence, Edward
I. took part with the Commons. And whereas
formerly, out of each County or shire two Knights and
two Citizens only were called, to represent their Grievances,
which having been debated by the King and
the House of Lords, they used to receive an answer
and to be sent home again: This King Edward called
together the Commons, and consulted with them concerning
the publick Affairs; tho' there are some who
will have their origin to be much more ancient. This
House, after it was once established, did extreamly
weaken the Authority of the Lords, and in process of
time did not a little diminish the Regal Power; for
ever since that time the Rights of the People were
maintained with a high hand, the House of Commons
imagining, that the sovereignty was lodged among
them, and if the Kings refused to gratify them in their
Requests, they used to grumble at their proceedings. 
And because the Power of the Parliament is not so
much established by any ancient Laws as Precedents
and Customs, this is the reason why it is always very
jealous of its Privileges, and always ready to make out
of one single Precedent a right belonging to it ever after. 
This Parliament the King is obliged to call together
as often as any extraordinary Taxes are to be levied
(for the Parliament did assign this King, at first,
for his ordinary Revenue, 1200000l. per annum,
which has been considerably augmented since) or any
old Laws are to be abrogated, or new ones to be made,

or any alteration to be made in Religion. For concerning
these matters the King cannot decree any thing
without consent of the Parliament. The Parliament
also used to take into consideration the state of the
Kingdom, and to present their Opinion to the King,
yet is the same of no force till approved of by the King. 
It often also calls into question the Ministers of state,
concerning the Administration of publick Affairs, and
inflicts Punishment upon them, with the King's approbation. 
And it is a common rule in England, that
whatever is committed against the Constitutions of the
Realm, is done by the Ministers and Officers; for the
King, they say, does never amiss, but his ill Counsellours,
which is not altogether contrary to Truth. But
if the Parliament should pretend to transgress its
bounds, the King has power to dissolve it; yet
ought the King also to be cautious in this, lest he should
by an unseasonable Dissolution of the Parliament exasperate
the People. §. 36. The Power and strength of England. 
          If we duely consider the Condition and Power
of England, we shall find it to be a powerfull and
considerable Kingdom, which is able to keep up the
Balance betwixt the Christian Princes in Europe; and
which depending on its own strength, is powerfull enough
to defend it self. For, because it is surrounded
every where by the sea, none can make any attempt
upon it, unless he be so powerfull at sea, as to be able
entirely to ruine the Naval Forces of England. And
if it should happen, that the English Fleet were quite
defeated, yet would it prove a very hard task, to transport
thither such an Army, as could be supposed to be
superiour to so powerfull a Force as the English Nation
is able to raise at home. But England ought to take
especial care, that it fall not into civil Dissentions, since
it has often felt the effects of the same, and the seeds of
them are remaining yet in that Nation; which chiefly
arises from the difference in Religion, and the fierce
Inclinations of this Nation, which makes it very fond
of Alterations. Nevertheless a Wise and Courageous
King may easily prevent this evil, if he does not act against
the general Inclination of the People, maintains

a good Correspondency with the Parliament; and for
the rest is very watchfull, and as soon as any Commotions
happen, takes off immediately the Ringleaders. 
Lastly,With relation to other states. 
         England and scotland being comprehended in one
Island, whose chiefest strength lies in a good Fleet, it
is evident, that this King need not make any great account
of such states as either are remote from the sea,
or else are not very powerfull in shipping. Wherefore,
as the King of England takes no great notice of
Germany (except as far as it relates to France or spain)
of Poland and other such like states; so it is easie for
him to curb the Pirates on the Barbary Coast: Which
Nests of Pirates might have been easily destroyed long
ago, if they had not been let alone on purpose to render
the Trade in the Mediterranean difficult to the
Hamburgers, and some others. England has nothing
to fear from Portugal; and this must rather hope for
assistance from England and Holland against spain. 
The Naval strength of the Northern Crowns,To the Northern Crowns. 
         England
need not be jealous of, as long as the same is divided. 
Yet it cannot be for the Interest of England, if one of
those Kings should become absolute Master of the East
sea, or that they should be fain to depend on the Discretion
of the Dutch. 
         To spain. since the Naval strength of
spain is mightily decaied England need not fear any
thing from thence: Yet does it not seem to be the Interest
of England to fall out with that Kingdom, considering
what a vast Trade the English have into spain;
for spain does either consume the English Commodities
at home, or else exchanges them for silver, by
sending of them into America. There are some who
have computed, that in case of a War with spain, the
English would lose in effects above thirty Millions;
and besides this, their Trade into the Levant and other
places, would be greatly endangered by the Privateers
of Ostend, Biscay, Majorca and Minorca, who at the
time of the Wars under Cromwell took 1500 Merchant-ships
from the English. 
         To France. Tho' the Land Forces
of France are now-adays much superiour to the English,
this Island both for its bigness and strength making
up not above a third part of France; yet the Naval
strength of France has hitherto not been able to

come in competition with the English. It is the chiefest
Interest of England, to keep up the Balance betwixt
France and spain, and to take a special care that
the King of France do not become Master of all the
Netherlands; for it is visible, that thereby his Power
at sea would be encreased to that degree, that he
might enter on a Design of being even with England,
for what they have formerly done to France. Holland
seems to be the only obstacle that the English cannot
be sole Masters of the sea and Trade,To Holland. tho' for the rest
they have no reason to fear the Dutch by Land, but only
at sea, because the Dutch Land Forces are not so considerable,
as to be able to undertake any thing of great
moment. Nevertheless, how desirous soever the English
are to be sole Masters at sea, yet does it not seem to
be the Interest of England, frequently to engage it self
in Wars with Holland, it having been observed, that
the Dutch, since the Wars with England are rather increased
in Valour, Experience, and Power at sea. And
because other Nations are not likely to suffer that Holland
should be swallowed up by the English, or that
one Nation should have the Monopoly of Europe; it
seems therefore the best method for the English, to let
the Dutch trade as well as themselves, and to set some
others upon their Backs, which may give them so
much work as thereby to give a check to their growing
Greatness, and in the mean while, take care to establish
their own Power at sea, and Commerce abroad▪
But least of all it would be for the Interest of
England, if Holland should be brought under the Yoak
of the French King, who, without question, by the
additional sea Forces of Holland, and the advantage of
the East India Trade, would be superiour in Power to
any in Europe. 
        CHAP. V. Of FRANCE. §. 1. The most ancient stare of France. 
          As far as we can search into the most ancient
Histories, it is evident from th•nce, That
Gaul, now called France, has been a very powerfull
and populous Country. For the Gauls in ancient times
had conquered a great part of Italy, where they settled
themselves; who also, when they had over-run Greece
and some other neighbouring Countries, inhabited a part
of the Lesser Asia, which was called from them Galatia
or Gallo-gracia: Yet formerly this so powerfull
Country did never either rightly understand or exert
its own strength against other Nations, because it was
not then under the Government of one Prince, but divided
into a great many p•••y states, which were always
at variance with one another. This much facilitated
the Conquest of the Romans over them, who
else stood not in fear of any Nation so much as the
Gauls. 
         Gaul subdued by the Romans. 
          And tho' the incomparable Valour of Julius
Caesar was chiefly instrumental in subduing this Nation,
yet with t•n Legions he had work enough to effect it
in ten Years time. But as soon as the Romans had
brought this fair Country under their subjection▪ they
emploied all means to suppress the Martial spirit of
this Nation, in which they succeeded as well in this as
in other Nations, it being their Custom to civilize and
refine the Manners of these Nations, thereby to render
them soft and e••eminate. After France had been
near 500 Years under the Dom•nion of the Romans, it
fell, under the Reign of the Emperour Honorius, into
the Hands of the Barbarous Nations. By the Barbarous Nations. For the Goths,
after they had over-run Italy, settled themselves in
Gallia Narbonensis, and the Burgundians, conquered
a considerable part of the rest. But the Franks entring
this Kingdom, settled and maintained themselves
in it, giving it the Name of France, after their
own Name. These Franks, were for certain, Germans,
tho' some of our Modern French Writers pretend to

demonstrate, That this Nation was a Colony of the
ancient Gauls, who being overstocked with People at
home, passed over the Rhine, and having settled a Colony
in Germany, after several hundred Years, returned
into their Native Country. That the Franks came out of Germany. 
          But it is more probable,
That the Franks are the same Nations which were formerly
encompassed by the Rivers of the Mayn, the
Rhine, the We•er, and the sea; and which in Tacitus's
time were called salii, Bructeri, Trisii, Angrivani,
Chamari, sigambri and Chatti, and who having entered
into a mutual Confederacy against the Romans,
called themselves, in spite of their Power, Franks, or
a free People, as not doubting but to be able to defend
their Liberty against them. The origin of the French Language. And it is certain, that
they did transplant the German Tongue into France,
which was for a great while after in fashion among
persons of the best Quality, till at last they used themselves,
by degrees, to the Latin Tongue, formerly introduced
by the Romans, which being corrupted by
the German Tongue produced the modern French
Language. It is also evident, that the Race of the
ancient Gauls was not quite extinguished, but that
both Nations were by degrees united in one, yet with
this difference, that the Frankish Families made up
the Body of the Nation. §. 2. But howsoever this be,Pharamond the first King. all Historians agree
in this, That the Franks did choose for their King, about
the Year 424, Pharamond, who established among
them wholsome Laws and Constitutions; yet
most are of Opinion that not this Pharamond, but his
son Clodion,
         Clodion. sirnamed Long-hair, invaded Gaul; who,
after he had been several times repulsed by Aetius the
Roman General, at last took Artois, Cambray, Tournay,
and some other places as far as the River somme,
making Amiens his place of Residence. He died in
the Year 447;Merovaeus. but his successour and Kinsman Merovaeus,
in conjunction with the Roman General Aetius
and Theodorick the King of the West Goths having
beaten Attila, the King of the Hans out of France,
extended his Dominions as far as Mentz on one side,
and on the other side conquered Picardy, Normandy,
         
and the greatest part of the Isle of France. The Romans
themselves contributed to this loss, for that not only in
the Battel fought against Attila, they had lost a great
many of their best Forces, but Aetius also being fallen into
disgrace with the Emperour Valentinian, was by him
murthered; which Aetius may be justly said to have
been the last great Captain the Romans had; there being
after his death no body left who could resist Merovaeus. 
From this King sprang the first Race of the
French Kings, which is called the Merovigian Family. 
He died in the Year 458. Childerick. His son Childerick,
for his Lasciviousness, was banished; in whose stead
one Aegidius of the ancient Race of the Gauls was set
up for King. But Childerick, through the faithfulness
of his Friend Guyeman, was after an Exile of eight
Years, recalled out of Thuringia, whither he fled, and
restored to his Throne; who drove back the Britains
and saxons, that made at that time great havock in
France. He also conquered that part which is now
called Lorrain, and took Beauvais, Paris, and some
other places near the Rivers of the Oise and the seyne. 
He died in the Year 481. Clouis I. His son Clouis or Lewis,
having killed syagrius, the son of Aegidius, established
the French Monarchy, and added great Territories to
the Kingdom. This King fell in love with Clotildis,
of the Royal Race of Burgundy, who promised to
marry him▪ if he would turn Christian. Which, however,
he afterwards delayed to perform, till the Alemans,
who would have got a footing in France, entered
that Kingdom, whom he meeting with his Army
near Zulick, a bloody Battel was fought, where,
when he saw the French began to fall in disorder, he
vowed, That if he obtained the Victory, he would be baptized;
which Vow,496. after the Victory he performed,
being baptized at Reims by st. Reim, whose example
the whole Nation of the French followed. This King
also overturned the Kingdom of the Goths, which they
had established in Languedock; uniting that Country
with his Kingdom: He also conquered several petty
Principalities, and a part of the Higher Germany. He
died in the Year 511. 
§. 3. France is divided. After the death of Clouis, France received a
signal blow, the Kingdom being divided among his
four sons; who, tho' they annexed the Kingdom of
Burgundy to it, yet this division weakened this Kingdom,
and administred Fuel to the following intestine
Dissentions. Nay, this impolitick dividing the Kingdom
went further still; for they subdivided the Kingdom
again among their sons, which occasioned most
horrible civil Commotions in France, these Kings endeavouring,
as it were, to out-do one another in Iniquity:
And among the rest, the two Queens Brunechildis
and Fredegundis are infamous for their monstrous
Crimes. At last, after a great many intestine
Divisions. Clotarius II, 
         Clotarius II. re-uniting the divided Kingdom,
did somewhat restore its ancient state. 614. He died
in the Year 628. Dagobert. But his son Dagobert fell into the
same Madness; for he not only gave part of the Kingdom
to his Brother Albert, but also divided his own
share among his two sons; neither did he do any
thing for the Benefit of the Publick during his Reign. 
From this time the French Kings quite degenerated
from their ancient Valour, giving themselves over to
Laziness and Debauchery. Wherefore the Grand Mareschals
of the Kingdom did by degrees assume the
Power and Administratinon of Publick Affairs. Among
these Pipin was famous, descended of a Noble
Family in Austrasia, who had the Administration of
Affairs during the space of twenty eight Years, under
several Kings. Char•es Martell. 714. His son Charles Martell succeeded his
Father in his Power and Office, which he rather augmented,
after he was grown famous by his Martial
Exploits, having chased away the saracens, who about
that time, conquering spain, fell also into France,
of whom he killed a vast number. 732. This Man took
upo• himself the Title of a Prince and Duke of France,
so that nothing remained with the Kings but the bare
Title and an empty Name, they being kept in the
Country, and once a Year carried for a show through
the City, to expose them to the view of the People
like strange Creatures. At last, Pipin the Younger,
son of this Charles Martell (who died in the Year 741)
having brought the great Men of the Kingdom over

to his Party, deposed King Childerick II. and having
sent him into a Convent,Pipin proclaimed King. got himself proclaimed King
of France. This was approved easily enough by Pope
Zachary, because he being in fear of the growing
Power of the Longobards in Italy,
         The Merovingian Family loses the Crown. did endeavour by
all means to oblige the King of France to come to his
Assistance. And thus the Merovignian Family loses
the Crown of France. 
         751. 
        §. 4. Pipin,
         Pipin's Expeditions. to convince the World that he was
not unworthy of the Crown, or else to furnish the
People with other Matters than to talk of the deposing
of Childerick, undertook an Expedition against
the saxons, whom he vanquished in a great Battel. 
And he had likewise, under the Reign of the former
Kings, undertaken several Expeditions into Germany
with great success, and subdued some of the Nations
bordering upon the Rhine. Not long after an Opportunity
presented it self to make himself famous in Italy,
For Aistulphus, the King of the Lombards, had
proposed to himself the Conquest of all Italy; after he
had chased the Governours of the Grecian Emperours,
which were then called Exarches, out of Ravenna,
and all other places which were under their Jurisdiction,
and was ready to march directly against Rome:
The Pope stephen III. being in great fear of this Enemy,
and not knowing where to find Assistance,
craved Aid of Pipin,
         He assists the Pope against the Lombards. 
          whom he at last persuaded to
take his part against Aistulphus. In this War Pipin
recovered from Aistulphus all what he had before taken
from the Grecian Emperours in Italy, the Revenue
of which, he, as 'tis pretended, gave to the Roman
see, reserving to himself, as it is very probable,
the sovereignty over these places. He gained, by this
Action, the Reputation of being very Zealous; and
by bestowing these Revenues upon the Holy Chair,
got a firm footing in Italy, and the advantage of
swaying Matters there according to his Pleasure. He
made also Tassilo, Duke of Ba•aria, his Vassal, and
beat the Duke of Aquitain. This Pipin died in the
Year 768, leaving behind him two sons, Charles and
Carolomannus, who divided the Kingdom betwixt

them. But Carolomannus dying quickly after, the
whole Kingdom fell to Charles. 
         Charles the Great. This Charles was
justly sirnamed the Great, he having carried the French
Monarchy to the highest pitch of its Greatness, none of
his successours having been able to attain to the like,
tho' some of 'em have aimed at it. For having routed
Desiderius, the last King of the Lombards, who
endeavoured to recover what was formerly taken from
Aistulphus, he conquered the Kingdom, and brought
it under his subjection. 774. He also subdued Germany,
having routed Tassilo, who had taken upon him the
Title of King of Bavaria. He also waged War against
the saxons, for the space of 32 Years, whom he
at last brought under his Obedience▪ obliging them
to embrace the Christian Faith. For which purpose
he erected several Episcopal sees and Monasteries, by
the help of the Priests, to reform the ba•barous Manners
of this savage People. He also beat the sclavonians,
Danes and Huns, and took from the saracens a
part of spain, as far as to the River Iberus; tho' his
Forces, in their return home, were overthrown near
Ronceval, where was also slain the famous Rowland. 
This Charles was in the Year 800,He is proclaimed Emperour of the Romans. 
          at Christmas, being
then at Rome, proclaimed Emperour by the People,
by the Instigation of the Pope, in st. Peter's
Church. Tho' he gained nothing by this Title, except
it was the sovereignty or Protection of the Roman
Church, and the Patrimony of st. Peter, if both
did not belong to him before, for all the rest he enjoied
before under other Titles. He died in the
Year 814. §. 5. After the death of Charles the Great, the
French Monarchy began to decline again, because his
son Lewis sirnamed the Pious,
         Lewis the Pious. was more fit to be a
Priest, than a souldier: And it is certain, that so vast a
Kingdom, where the new Conquests were not yet well
settled, did require a Prince of a Military spirit. And
notwithstanding he had the good Fortune to force
some of the Rebellious Nations to return to their Duty,
yet he committed, afterwards, two fatal Oversights,
when in his life time he gave to his sons the

Titles of Kings,He divides his Kingdom. and divided the Kingdom betwixt
them. The first of which proved pernicious to himself,
the second to the Monarchy. For these impious
and ungratefull sons were not for staying for their Father's
Death,His sons Rebell. but Rebelling against him, and made
him, after he was deserted by every body, their Prisoner. 
The Bishops, who were by him kept under
strict Discipline, after they had condemned him,
forced him to resign the Government. 833. But the great
Men of the Kingdom quickly repenting, restored him
to his Throne, and he also pardoned his sons. He
died in the Year 840, having before his Death made a
new Division of the Kingdom betwixt his sons; the
Effects of which appeared soon after to the World,
when Lotharius, the elder Brother, who also had the
Title of Emperour, undertook to take from his Brothers
their Portion; against whom, the two other Brothers,
Lewis and Charles entring into a Confederacy,
forced him to divide the Monarchy with them, having
first obtained a bloody Victory near Fountenay
unfar Auxerre, in which Battel were slain above
100000 Men, and among them the Flower of the
French Nation. Germany divided from France. In this Division Germany fell to
Lewis's share, which ever since has continued separate
from France, and has made a distinct Empire. But
the younger Brother,Charles the Bald. 
         Charles sirnamed the Bald, got
for his Portion the greatest part of France, viz. all
that part which lies betwixt the Western Ocean and
the Meuse; but the eldest Brother obtained Italy, Provence,
and all those Counties which are situated betwixt
the Meuse, Rhine, and the some. Under the
Reign of this Charles the Bald,
         The Normans make an Irruption into France,
          the Normans (so they
called the Danes and Norwegians) fell, with a considerable
Force, into France, making great Havock
where-ever they came: And the Kingdom was weakned
to that degree, by the last bloody Battel, and its
being divided into so many Principalities (for the sons
of Lotharius had also shared their Father's Provinces
among themselves) that it was not strong enough to
chase out of its Dominions these Robbers, but was
obliged,912. under Charles sirnamed the simple, to give into
their possession the Province of Neustria, which they called

after their Name, Normandy. The sons of Lotharius
dying without Issue, Charles the Bald and the sons of
Lewis shared their Part betwixt them, out of which
Charles got Provence. At last Charles obtained the
Title of Emperour, and died in the Year 877. His
son Lewis sirnamed Balbus,
         Ludovicus Balbus. succeeded him, who dying
soon after, left the Kingdom to his two sons,
who were very young,Ludov. III. and Carolomannus. 
         viz. to Lewis III. and Carolomannus;
from whom Lewis King of Germany took
Lorrain. Lewis dying in the Year 882, as did Carolomannus
in the Year 884, none was left but a Brother
of theirs by the Father's side, viz. the son of
Lewis sirnamed Balbus, who being then a Child of
five Years of Age,Charles the simple. was afterwards called Charles the
simple. For at that time the Authority of the Kings
of France was decaied to that degree, that it was a
common custom to give them sirnames according to
the several defects of Body or Mind, as were obvious
in them. He was, during his Minority, committed to
the Tuition of his Cousin Carolus Crassus, who also had
the Title of Emperours, who not long after, because
he was very infirm both in Body and Mind, was deposed,
and died in the Year 888. The decay of the Royal Authority. The Royal Authority
being thus decaied, and nothing but Divisions
found in the Kingdom,The Excessive Power of the Nobles. the great Men of the Kingdom
mightily increased their own Power, so that,
whereas they used formerly to be Governours of their
Provinces under the King's Command, they now began
to claim them as a Propriety belonging to themselves,
independent of the King. It is related by
some, That the Kings at that time had nothing left
but Rheims and Laon which they could really call
their own; which Evil could not be totally suppressed
by the following Kings, till several hundred Years after. 
After the Death of Carolus Crassus,
         Eudo Count of Paris crowned King of France, 923. 
         Eudo Count
of Paris got himself to be crowned King, and waged
War with Charles the simple, but died in the Year
898:Rudolf of Burgundy crowned King▪
           
          Yet Charles the simple, quickly found another
Rival for the Crown. For Rudolf King of Burgundy,
got himself to be crowned King of France, making
Charles the simple his Prisoner, who died during his
Imprisonment. 929. After the Death of Rudolf (which

happened in the Year 936) reigned Lewis IV. Lewis Outremer. sirnamed
Outremer, because he had, during the Imprisonment
of his Father, sheltered himself in England. This
King's Reign was full of intestine Commotions; he
died in the Year 954, leaving for his successour his son
Lotharius,
         Lotharius. who likewise reigned in continual troubles
till the Year 985,Lewis the Fainthearted. leaving behind him his son Lewis
sirnamed the Faint-hearted, of whom the French Historians
only say this, that he did nothing. He had
for his Tutor and Administrator of the Kingdom,
Hugh Capet Earl of Paris. 
         987. After this King's Death,
his Uncle, viz. Lewis sirnamed Outremer's son, laid
claim to the Crown, but was disappointed in his Pretensions
by the great Power of Hugh Capet. He afterwards
endeavoured to maintain his Right by force of
Arms, but was made a Prisoner, and dying in Prison,
put an end to the Carolinian Race,The Carolinian Family extinguished. or at least, to its
Inheritance of the Crown of France, which had been
in its possession for at least 236 Years. It is very remarkable,
that this Family lost the Kingdom through
the same Errour which the former lost it. For tho'
this Family, by prodigious Conquests, had raised the
Power of France, yet were the Conquests soon after,
by the Divisions made of the Kingdom again dis-united,
and even a considerable part quite separated from
that Kingdom, and annexed to the German Empire▪
Besides this, by the Negligence of these Kings, and
the excessive Power of the great Men in the Kingdom,
France was reduced to a very low Condition. §. 6. As Hugh Capet,
         Hugh Capet, the first of the present Race. the first Founder of the present
Royal Family, obtained the Crown, not so much
by right of succession as by the assistance of the chief
Men of the Kingdom, who excluded the right Heir;
so (as it is very probable) he was obliged to remit a
great many of the ancient Royal Prerogatives, and to
confirm to the great Men of the Kingdom the Power
of governing their Provinces, with the Titles of Dukes
and Earls, under condition that they should acknowledge
themselves Vassals of the Kingdom, yet not
be obliged to depend absolutely on the King's Commands;
so that France at that time was like a

mishapen and weak Body. Hugh, in the mean time,
re-united to the Crown (which at that time had scarce
any thing left which could be called her own) the
County of Paris, the Dutchy of France, wherein was
comprehended all that lies betwixt the Rivers of seine
and the Loire, and the County of Orleans. Among
the great Men of the Kingdom, the chief were the
Dukes of Normandy (on whom also depended Britainy)
of Burgundy, Aquitain and Gascoigne; the Earls
of Flanders, Champaign and Tolouse, the latter of
which was also Duke of Languedock: But the Counties
of Vienne, Provence, savoy and Dauphine belonged
to the Kingdom of Arelat, which was a part of the
German Empire. Yet these Kings had at last the
good Fortune to see all these Demi-sovereign Princes
extinguished, and their Countries re-united to the
Crown of France. Hugh died in the Year 996, whose
son Robert,
         Robert. a good natured Prince, reigned very peaceably,
he having reduced the Dukedom of Burgundy,
to which, he, after the Death of his Uncle, was the
next Heir, under the entire Jurisdiction of the Crown. 
The Tyranny exercised by the Pope against this King
ought to be mentioned here. For, the King having
an Intention of marrying Bertha, of the House of
Burgundy, which Match was esteemed very beneficial
to his state, and the said Bertha standing with him in
the fourth degree of Consanguinity; besides that, he
had been Godfather to a Child of hers in her former
Husband's time: He desired and obtained the Consent
of his Bishops, the said Marriage being otherwise against
the Canon Law. The Pope excommunicates him and his Kingdom. But the Pope took hence an
occasion to Excommunicate the King and the whole
Kingdom, which proved so mischievous, that the
King was deserted by all his servants, except three or
four, and no Body would touch the Victuals that
came from his Table, which was therefore thrown to
the Dogs. He died in the Year 1033. The Reign of
his son Henry was also not very famous,Henry I. except that
he waged some inconsiderable Wars against his Vassals. 
He presented his Brother Robert with the Dukedom of
Burgundy, from whence comes the Race of the Dukes
of Burgundy descended from the Royal Blood. He

died in the Year 1060. Philip I. His son Philip did nothing
memorable; he was also for his Marriage excommunicated
by the Pope, but at last obtained a Dispensation. 
Under the Reign of this King Philip, William
Duke of Normandy conquered England,
         Will. Duke of Normandy conquers England. 
          which proved
to be the occasion of unspeakable Miseries to France;
for these two Kingdoms were ever after in continual
Wars, till the English were driven out of France. About
the same time the first Expedition was undertaken
into the Holy Land,
         Expedition into the Holy Land. 
          which Extravagancy continued
for near 200 Years after. The Popes drew the
most Benefit from these Expeditions, assuming to
themselves, an Authority, not only to command, but
also to protect all such as had listed themselves under
the Cross. Under this pretext also frequent Indulgences
were sent abroad into the World, and what
was given towards the use of this War, was collected
and distributed by their Legates. The King of France,
and other Kings, received thereby this Benefit, That
these Wars carried off a great many turbulent spirits:
And a great many of the Nobility used either to sell
or else to mortgage their Estates; and if any of them
happened to die in the Expedition, leaving no Heirs
behind them, their Estates fell to the King. By this
means also, that prodigious number of People, wherewith
France was overstocked at that time, was much
diminished, whereby the Kings got an Opportunity
to deal more easily with the rest. Nevertheless, when
afterwards the Kings, either by Instigation of the
Popes, or out of their own Inclinations, undertook
these Expeditions in their own Persons, they found
the dismal effects of it. For, by so doing, the best of
their subjects were led to the slaughter; and yet it
was impossible to maintain these Conquests as long as
they were not Masters of Egypt: Whereas, if this
Kingdom had been made the seat of the intended
Empire, and the store-house of the War, a Kingdom
might have been established, which would have been
able to support it self by its own strength. This
King died in the Year 1108. Lewis the Fat▪
          His son Lewis sirnamed
the Fat was always at variance with Henry I. King of
England, and in continual Troubles with the petty

Lords in France, who did considerable Mischiefs from
their strong Castles; yet he was too hard for them at
last,Lewis VII. and died in the Year 1137. His son Lewis VII. 
sirnamed the Younger,
         His unfortunate Expedition to the Holy Land. 
          undertook, upon the Persuasion
of st. Bernhard, an Expedition into the Holy
Land, but this proved a fatal Expedition, for by the
Defeat which he received at Pamphylia, and the siege
of Damascus, which he was forced to quit, and the
Fatigues of so great a Journey, as well as the perfidiousness
of some of the Commanders, after he had
ruined a great Army, he returned with the miserable
Remainders into France, without having done any
thing answerable to such an Undertaking: But he
committed the greatest Error, when he divorced himself
from his Lady Eleonora, whether out of Jealousie
or tenderness of Conscience is uncertain, she being his
Cousin in the third or fourth degree. This Eleonora
being also the only Heiress of Aquitain and Poictou,
was immediately after married to Henry Duke of Normandy,
afterwards King of England, the second of
that Name, who, by this Match annexed these fair
Countries to the Crown of England. In fine, having
been kept in a continual alarm by his petty Vassals,
but especially by Henry II. King of England. He
died in the Year 1180. §. 7. His son Philip II. sirnamed Augustus,
         Philip II. the Conquerour. or the
Conquerour, was at first engaged in a War against
Henry II. King of England, from whom he took several
considerable places; which, however he restored
afterwards to his son Richard, with whom he entered
into a League to retake Jerusalem from the saracens,
pursuant to which,Another Expedition to the Holy Land. 
          both the Kings went thither in
Person with a considerable Force. But a Jealousie arising
betwixt these two Kings, nothing was done
worth mentioning; for Richard accused Philip, that
he had an ill design against him in sicily, in their
Voyage; besides that, he had refused to consummate
the before intended Match betwixt his sister and Richard:
Wherefore, as soon as Ptolemais had been taken
by their joint Forces, Philip, under pretence of
sickness returned into France, leaving only with Richard,

Hugh III. Duke of Burgundy, with some
Troops; who envying Richard, hindered the taking
of the City of Jerusalem. After his return from that
unfortunate Expedition to the Holy Land, he undertook
a War against Richard,
         War betwixt France and England. 
          which he also carried on
against his Brother John, wherein Philip had much
the better of the English, for he took from them Normandy,
the Counties of Anjou, Maine, Touraine, Berry
and Poictou. He was very instrumental in deposing
the Earl of Tholouse, who, because he had taken into
his Protection the Albigenses, was excommunicated
by the Pope. Philip also obtained a great Victory
near Bouvines, betwixt Lisle and Tournay, against the
Emperour Otho IV. who being joined with the Earl of
Flanders, attacked him with an Army of 150000 Men,
whilst the King of England was to fall into France on
the side of Aquitain. This King was so successfull in
his Wars against England, that his son Lewis was very
near obtaining the Crown of England. And tho'
he was chased again out of England, yet did he, after
his Father's Death,1223. pursue his Victories against the English
in France, taking from them, among others,
the City of Rochelle. 
         Lewis VIII. But this Lewis VIII. did not
reign long, for he died in the Year 1226, leaving for
successour his son Lewis IX. Lewis IX. sirnamed the Holy, during
whose Minority, his Mother Blanch of Castile had
the supream Administration of Affairs; and tho' some
of the Nobility raised great Troubles against her, she
subdued them all by her singular Prudence. In the
Year 1244, the City of Jerusalem was ransacked by
some Persians, who called themselves Chorasmii,
Lewis being about the same time dangerously ill,
made a Vow, That if he recovered he would undertake
an Expedition against those Infidels; which he afterwards
performed. A third Expedition to the Holy Land without success. But before his departure he issued
out his Proclamation throughout the Kingdom, intimating,
that whoever had received any damage by
his souldiers, should have Restitution made him,
which was performed accordingly. In this Expedition
he took the strong City of Damiata; but the overflowing
of the River Nile, hindered him from taking
Grand Cairo. After the River was returned to its usual

Bounds, he vanquished the Enemy in two Battels;
but they having received new Reinforcements, cut off
the Provisions from the French, who were also extreamly
pestered with the scurvy. The King then
resolved to retreat towards Damiata, but in his March
thither they attacked him, gave him a terrible overthrow,
and took him Prisoner, yet released him again
for a Ransom of 400000 Livres, he being obliged to
restore also to them the City of Damiata. Thus he
marched with the Remainders of his Army, which
from 30000 Men was mouldered away to 6000, to
Ptolemais, where, after he had given what Assistance
he could to the Christians,1254. he at last returned home. 
Under the Reign of this King,The first Pretensions of the French upon the Kingdom of Naples. 
          
         France got first an
Opportunity to intermeddle in the Affairs of Italy,
from whence, yet this Kingdom never reapt any great
Benefit. Manfred, natural son of the Emperour
Frederick II. having first killed King Conrad his Brother,
made himself King of Naples and sicily. But
the Pope, on whom this Kingdom depended as a
Fief, being dissatisfied with Manfred, offered the same
to Charles Earl of Anjou, Brother of Lewis IV. King
of France, which he having accepted of, was crowned
at Rome,
         1261. with Conditon, that he should pay to
the Pope 8000 Ounces of Gold, make a yearly Present
of a White Horse, as an acknowledgment; and
if he was chosen Emperour, that he should not unite
that Kingdom with the Empire; the Pope being unwilling
to have any one more powerfull than himself
in Italy. Charles thereupon vanquished Manfred,
and having murthered him and his Children, took
possession of the Kingdom. The young Conradin,
Duke of swabia, came with an Army to recover the
Kingdom, which was his Inheritance, from his Grandfather,
but having been overthrown in a Battel near
the Lake of Celano,
         1268. was made a Prisoner, and in the
Year next following, had his Head cut off at Naples,
upon the Instigation of the Pope, who being asked
by Charles, What he had best to do with his Prisoner?
answered, Vita Conradini, mors Caroli; Mors Conradini,
vita Caroli; i. e. The Life of Conradin is the
Death of Charles; The Death of Conradin the Life

of Charles. And as by the Death of this young Prince
was extinguished the Noble Race of the Dukes of swabia,
so this Charles laid the first Pretensions of France
to the Kingdom of Naples. In the mean while, King
Lewis being not satisfied with his former unfortunate
Expedition against the Infidels,An unfortunate Expedition of s. Lewis. 
          resolved to try again
his Fortune against Tunis, either because he found,
that this place lay very convenient for his Brother's
Kingdom of sicily, or because he hoped thereby to
open a way for the Conquest of Egypt, without which,
all the Expeditions into the Holy Land, were likely to
prove ineffectual. But in this siege he lost a great
part of his Army by sickness, and he died himself
there in the Year 1270. From a younger son of this
Lewis IV. viz. from Robert Earl of Clairmont, sprang
the Bourbon Family, which now sways the scepter of
France. 
        §. 8. Philip the Hardy. His son Philip sirnamed the Hardy succeeded
him, under whose Reign that considerable Earldom
of Tholouse was united to the Crown of France. Alfonsus
son of Lewis IX. who had married the only
Heiress of this Country, happening to die without Issue,
in an Expedition into Africa. Under the Reign also
of this King fell out the so much celebrated sicilian
Vespers,
         The sicilian Vespers. whereby all the French were at one blow extirpated
out of sicily. The Business was thus; some
Frenchmen had ravished the Wife of John of Porchyta,
born at salerno, who, enflamed with Revenge,
did seek for Aid of Pieter King of Arragon, hoping,
by his Assistance, to drive Charles out of sicily; the
sicilians also being very averse to the French, who had
committed great Outrages in that Kingdom. Pope
Nicholus V. lent a helping hand, who stood in fear
of the Power of Charles; as did also Michael Paleologus
the Constantinopolitan Emperour, because Charles
had made some Pretensions to that Empire. John
therefore, disguised in a Monks Habit, travelled about
from place to place, till he had brought his Design to
Perfection. It was next to a Miracle that the Design
was not betraied in three years time, it having been
so long a forming in several places▪
         1282. At last it was

put in Execution, it being agreed upon, that in the
second Holyday in Easter, at that very time when
the Bells rung in to the Vespers, all the French
throughout the whole Kingdom of sicily should be
massacred at once, which was done accordingly, within
two Hours time with great Barbarity, no person
having been spared in the Massacre. Which being
done, Pieter King of Arragon possessed himself of the
Kingdom of sicily. And, tho' the Pope ordered the
Croisade to be preached up against Pieter, and declared
Charles, the second son of Philip King of Arragon,
and this Philip marched with a great Army to put
his son into possession, yet it did prove labour in vain,
and Philip died in the Year 1285. Philip the Handsom▪
          His son and successour
Philip sirnamed the Handsom, upon some frivolous
Pretences,1292. began a War with the English, taking
from of them the City of Bourdeaux, and the greatest
part of Aquitain, which however they soon after recovered
by vertue of a Peace concluded betwixt them. 
Not long after he attacked the Earl of Flanders,
         He has ill success in Flanders. 
          who,
by the Instigation of the English had entered into a
Consederacy with a great many neighbouring Lords
against him, from whom he took most of his strong
Holds. But the Flemings, being soon tired with the
Insolencies committed by the French, cut in pieces
the French Garrisons; whereupon the King sent an
Army under the Command of Robert Earl of Artois,
to reduce them to Obedience;1302. but he was defeated
near Courtray, there being 20000 French slain upon
the spot, which happened chiefly by a Misfortune, that
the Cavalry was misled into a moorish Ground. It is
related, that the Flemings got above 8000 gilt spurs as
a Booty from the French. 
         1304. And tho' afterwards there
were 25000 killed of the Flemings, yet they quickly
recollecting themselves, raised another Army of 60000
Men, and obliged the King, by a Peace made betwixt
them, to restore them to their ancient state. This
King Philip also, with consent of the Pope, suppressed
the rich Order of the Knights Templers, and died in
the Year 1314. He suppressed the Templers. 
          Whom succeeded his three sons, each in
his turn, who all died without Issue, and without
doing any thing of moment. Lewis X. The eldest, Lewis X. 

sirnamed Hutin, died in the Year 1316; whose Brother
Philip sirnamed the Tall,
         Philip the Tall. had a Contest for the
Crown with his deceased Brother's Daughter Joan,
she being supported by her Mother's Brother, the
Duke of Burgundy, but it was determined in favour
of Philip by vertue of the salick Law. Under this
King the Jews were banished out of France, they having
been accused of poisoning the Fountains. He
died in the Year 1322. Him succeeded the third Brother
Charles IV. Charles IV. sirnamed the Handsom, under whose
Reign all the Italians and Lombards, who being Usurers,
did exact upon the People, were banished the
Kingdom. A War also was begun in Aquitain against
the English, but these Differences were quickly composed
by the Intercession of Queen Isabella, sister of
Charles. He died in the Year 1328. §. 9. After the Death of this King;Philip of Valois. 
         France was for
a great many years together torn in pieces by very unfortunate
and bloody Wars, which had almost proved
fatal to this Kingdom:His Title conte•ted by Edward III. of England, and in what ground. For a Contest arose about the
succession, betwixt Philip of Valois, Philip the Handsom's
Brother's son, and Edward III. King of England,
the above-mentioned Philip the Handsom's
Daughter's son. The former pretended a right by
vertue of the salick Law, which excludes the Females
from the succession: But the latter, tho' he did not
deny the salick Law, yet did he alledge, That this
Law did not barr from the succession the sons born of
the King's Daughters. And it was certain, that he
was nearer a kin to the deceased King than Philip,
neither could any Precedent be brought where a son
of the King's Daughter had been excluded from the
succession to admit his Brother's son: Yet the Estates
of France declared for Philip, partly upon the persuasion
of Robert Earl of Artois, partly because they
were unwilling to depend on England. And tho' King
Edward did dissemble at first, this Affront, and came
in person to do homage to Philip for his Provinces
which he was possessed of in France; yet not long after
he began to show his Resentment, the French having
obliged him at the time when he performed the

Ceremony of Homage, to lay aside his Crown, scepter
and spurs. Besides, the states of England did persuade
him not so easily to let fall his Pretensions, and
Robert Earl of Artois, being fallen out with Philip about
some Pretensions concerning the County of Artois,
did stir up King Edward to undertake a War against
France. In the mean time while Philip had defeated
the Flemings, who were risen in Rebellion against
that Earl, to that degree, that of 16000 Men not one
escaped the sword. War with England. 
          In the Year 1336 the English began
to make War against France, which was carried
on for some Years with equal Advantage on both
sides, and was interrupted by several Truces; till at
last Edward landed with an Army in Normandy, and
outbraving the French, approached to the very Gates
of Paris. But Edward making soon after his Retreat
through Picardy towards Flanders, was overtaken by
Philip near Albeville,
         Battel near Crecy. 
          where a bloody Battel was
fought betwixt them. The French Forces being extreamly
tired by a long March gave the English an
easier Victory. Besides this, some Genoese Foot retreated
immediately, their Bows having been rendered
useless by the rainy Weather; which the Duke
d' Alenzon perceiving, and thinking it to have been done
by Treachery, fell with a Body of Horse in among
them, which caused the first Confusion. The English also
made use of four or five pieces of great Cannon against
the French, which being never seen before in France,
caused a great terrour in the French Army. several
French Lords also being not well satisfied with the
King, were glad to see him defeated. This Victory
is the more remarkable, because (according to the
French Historians) the English were not above 24000
strong, whereas the French were above 100000. Out
of which number 30000 Foot souldiers were slain,
and 1200 Horsemen, among whom was the King of
Bohemia. This King, tho' he was blind, yet charged
the Enemy on Horseback betwixt two of his Friends,
who had tied his Horse to theirs, and they were all
three found dead together. The next day there was
a great slaughter made among some French Troops,
who not knowing what had passed the day before,

were on their March to join the French Camp. After
this Battel the English took Calais,
         The English take Cal•is. 
         Philip having in
vain attempted its relief with 15000 Men. This unfortunate
King,1347. however, received this one Comfort,
That the Dukedom of Dauphine was annexed to the
Crown of France by a Gift of Hubert the last Duke,Dauphine annexed to France. 
with Condition, that the eldest son of the Kings of
France should bear the Title of Dauphin. This
Hubert having conceived a mortal hatred against
the then Earl of savoy had before put himself under
the Protection of France; but when afterwards by an
unfortunate Accident he killed his only son, he retired
into a Monastery, giving to the King of France
the Possession of his Country. 1349. This King Philip also
bought Roussilion and Montpelier, and was the first
who imposed that so much abominated Tax in France
upon salt,Philip introduced the Gabell. called the Gabell, whereby the subjects are
obliged to pay for the sun and sea Water at so dear a
rate. Wherefore King Edward used to call him in
jest, The Author of the salick Law. He died in the
Year 1356. §. 10. John. His son and successour John was more unfortunate
in his Wars against the English than his Father. Ʋnfortunate in his Wars against the English. 
         
For the Truce being expired, the War began
afresh, wherein Prince Edward made an Inrode with
12000 Men out of Aquitain, destroying all roundabout
him; King John intending to cut off his Retreat,
overtook him with all his Forces near Maupertuis,
two Leagues from Poictiers. 
         Battel near Poictiers. 
          The Prince offered the
King satisfaction for the Damage sustained, which he
refusing to accept of, attacked Prince Edward in his
advantageous Post, he being surrounded with Hedges
and Vineyards; but the English, by the help of their
Bows, soon broke through his Van-guard, and afterwards
the whole Army, which consisted of 50000
Men, put them in Disorder, killing upon the spot
(as it is related by the French Historians) 6000 French,
among whom were 1200 Gentlemen, the King and
his youngest son were both made Prisoners: The three
eldest had the good Fortune to escape. 1356. During the
Father's Imprisonment Charles the Dauphin took

upon him the Administration of Affairs, but the People
which had been sorely oppressed hitherto, being
unwilling to obey it, caused great Disorders in the
Kingdom. The Peasants rise up against the Nobility,
and the Citizens of Paris made heavy Complaints. 
The souldiers for want of Pay lived at Discretion, and
made a miserable havock in the Country; Charles of
Navarre added Fuel to the Fire, in hopes to make his
own Advantage by these Troublesome times, and did
not stick to make Pretensions to the Crown; yet
Matters were composed with him at last. And the
Estates of France refusing to accept of such Conditions
as were proposed by the English, the King of England
entered France with a great Army, and over-run the
greatest part of it, yet could not make himself Master
of any fortified place. Then a Peace was concluded
at Bretigny, a League from Chartres; by vertue of
which the French were to surrender to the English, besides
what they were possessed of before, Poictou, Xaintonge,
Rochelle, Pais d'Aulnis, Angoumois, Perigord,
Limosin, Quercy, Agenois, and Bigorre, with the sovereignty
over them; besides this, Calais, and the
Counties d'Oye, Guisnes and Ponthieu, and three Millions
of Livers, as a Ransom for the King's person. 
This Peace was very hard for France,
         A dishonourable Peace to France. 
          and continued
not long. King John, forced by Necessity, was obliged
to do another thing little becoming his Grandeur, for
he sold his Daughter to Galeas Viscount of Milan,
         1360. 
for 600000 Crowns, giving her in Marriage to the said
Viscount. This King presented his youngest son Philip
sirnamed the Hardy, with the Dukedom of Burgundy,
it being vacant by the Death of the last Duke. 
From this Philip descended the famous Dukes of Burgundy,
whose Territories, at last, devolved to the
House of Austria. This King died in England, whither
he was gone to make satisfaction for his son,
who being a Hostage there had made his escape. 
some say, that he went to see a Lady there, with
whom he was much in love. 1364. 
        §. 11. Charles the Wise, King John was succeeded by his son
Charles V. sirnamed the Wise, who prudently made

amends for the Rashness of his Grandfather and Father,
never engaging himself in Battels with the English,
but by protracting the War and secret Intrigues,
endeavoured to tire out their Courage. The disbanded
souldiers had mutineered, and were become so Insolent,
that no body durst oppose them. These he
sent into spain, where Pieter sirnamed the Cruel and
Henry I. fought for the Crown of Castile. These
Forces had put the Pope in such a fear, that in their
March he presented them with 200000 Livers and a
good store of Indulgences, to divert them thereby
form taking their way near Avignon. Prince Edward
also engaged himself in this War, but got nothing by
it but a sickly Body and great want of Money. Wherefore
he pretend•ng to lay a Tax upon his subjects in
Guienne, to pay off his souldiers, they complained
thereof to the King of France; who having well prepared
himself, and being informed that the Prince languished
under a mortal Disease, summoned him to
appear in Paris, pretending, that the Peace made at
Bretigny was of no force, since the English had not
performed the Conditions, and had since that time
committed Hostilities, wherefore he insisted upon his
former right of sovereignty over Aquitain. And
Prince Edward having sent him a disdainfull Answer,
King Charles denounced War against the English,
         He declares War against the English. 
         
A great many Fast-days and Processions were kept by
the King's Order in France; and the Priests made it
their business to represent the Justice of the King's
Cause, and the Injustice of the English to the People. 
By this way he insinuated himself into the Favour of
the French that lived under the English Jurisdiction, and
persuaded his own subjects to be more free in paying
their Taxes. The Archbishop of Tholouse alone, did,
by his cunning Persuasions, bring over to his Party above
fifty Cities and strong Castles. The Constable
Bertrand du Guesolin did also great mischief to the
English with small Parties, and worsted them not only
in several Rencounters, but also beat them out of
Perigord and Limosin: But in Guienne, especially, the
English Affairs were in a bad condition, after the spanish
Fleet, which was sent to the Assistance of the

         French by Henry King of Castile, had ruined the English
near Rochelle. After which exploit Poictiers was
taken from them, and Rochelle upon very advantageous
Conditions, surrendered it self to the King of France. 
And King Edward being detained by contrary Winds,
not being able to bring over timely Relief, Xaintonge,
Angoumois, and some other places, followed the Example
of the former, The English, not long after,
with an Army of 30000 Men, marched from Calais
cross the Country as far as Guienne, ravaging and plundering
by the way where-ever they came, yet would
Charles never hazard a Battel with them, but contented
himself to annoy them with skirmishes, whereby
he did them considerable Mischief. The Pope, in
the mean while, laboured hard to make Peace betwixt
these two Crowns, but King Edward happening to
die about that time,After the Death of Edward, Charles attacks the English with Advantag•. King Charles took hold of this
Opportunity, and attacking the English with five several
Armies at one time, took all from them but
Calais, Bourdeaux and Bayonne in Guienne, and Cherbury
in Normandy. The English, during the Minority
of their King, being also pestered with the Plague
and the War with the scots, were not in a Capacity
to send sufficient Relief: Yet this King miscarried in
his Enterprize against Britainy. In the Year 1379,
the Emperour Charles IV. came to visit him in Paris,
where he constituted the Dauphin a perpetual Vicar
of the Empire in Dauphine: And ever since, say the
French, the German Emperours never did pretend to
any thing in Dauphine, and in the Kingdom of A•elat. 
He died in the Year 1380. §. 12. Charles VI. Now we are come to that most unfortunate
Reign of Charles VI. at the very beginning of which,
one of the main occasions of Mischief to France was,
That Joan Queen of Naples standing in fear of Charles
de Duraz, did adopt Lewis Duke of Anjou, declaring
him Heir of that Kingdom. The Duke willingly
accepting of her Offer, raised, in her behalf, an Army
of 30000 Horse, having employed thereunto the
Treasure left by Charles V. which he had got clandestinely
into his possession. With this Army be made

himself Master of Provence, which then belonged to
Joan. And tho' in the mean time Charles de Duraz
having killed Joan, had made himself Master of the
Kingdom, the Duke of Anjou, nevertheless, pursued his
intended Expedition; but was, by continual Marches,
and the Cunning of Charles, led about and tired to
that degree, that he died in great Misery, very few of
so great an Army having had the good fortune to return
into France. 
         1384. The People also were generally
much dissatisfied at the beginning, because those who
had the Tuition of the King, to curry-favour with
the People, had promised an abatement of the heavy
Taxes. But the same being not long after again introduced,
augmented and devoured by the Courtiers,
great Troubles and Insurrections arose both in Paris
and other places. In the mean while the Flemings
had carried themselves insolently towards their Lord,
who calling to his Assistance, the French, they killed
40000 Flemings, together with their General Arteville. 
The general Dissatisfaction of the People was
much increased afterward,1382. when a great summ of
Money was employed upon an Expedition against
England, which proving fruitless, both the Money and
Men were lost. The first rise of the French Pretensions upon Milan•
           
          
         Lewis Duke of Orleans, Brother of
this King Charles, married Valentina the Daughter of
John Ga••acius Viscount of Milan, with this Condition,
That he should receive immediately, as a Dowry,
not only a great Treasure of Money and Jewels,
but also the County of Ast; and in case her Father
should die without Issue, the whole Country should
be devolved on Valentina and her Children. Which
Contract has not only furnished France with a Pretension
to Milan, but also has been the occasion of
great Calamities. After this another Misfortune happened
to France, for the King, whose Brains were
mightily weakened by Debaucheries in his younger
Years,〈…〉. as he was travelling in Britainy, fell upon a
sudden Distraction, caused, partly by the great Heat,
which was then in the Month of August; partly, because,
as 'tis reported, a tall black Man appeared to
him, who, stopping his Horse by the Bridle, said,
stop King, whither will you go? you are betraied,
         
soon after a Page being faln asleep, let the point of his
Lance drop upon the Headpiece of him who rid just
before the King, which the King being extreamly surprized
at, interpreted it as directed against him. And
tho' this Madness did cease afterwards, yet was his
Understanding much impaired, and the Fits would
return by intervals. This unhappy Accident was the
occasion of that fatal Contest concerning the Administration
of the Kingdom (which the King was incapable
of) betwixt Lewis Duke of Orleans, the King's
Brother, and Philip Duke of Burgundy, his Uncle. 
The first claimed it on the account of proximity of
Blood, the latter on account of his Age and Experience. 
The latter was most approved of by the Estates,
who declared him Regent; yet the Duke of Orleans,
by making new Intrigues, still endeavoured to make
himself the Head of the Kingdam, which caused pernicious
Factions in the Court. And tho' the Duke of
Burgundy died,1404. his son John pursuing his Father's Pretensions,
the Hatred so increased betwixt both Parties,
that notwithstanding the Reconciliation made betwixt
them,The Duke of Orleans assassinated by the Duke of Eurgundy, 1407. the Duke of Burgundy caused the Duke of Orleans
to be murthered by some Ruffians, at Night, in
the streets of Paris. And tho' the Duke of Burgundy,
after having made away his Rival, and forced a Pardon
from the King, was now the only Man in the
Court, yet were the Animosities betwixt the Duke
of Burgundy, and the sons of the murthered Duke of
Orleans, not extinguished thereby, which divided the
whole Kingdom into two Factions, one siding with
the Burgundian, the other with the Family of Orleans,
and occasioned barbarous Murthers, Devastations, and
such other Calamities, which are the common products
of Civil Commotions. At last the Burgundian
Faction was brought very low by the King and his
Party. The English take advantage of these Troubles. But the English having observed the intestine
Divisions in France, landed in Normandy with a great
Army, and took Harfleur: But being extreamly
weakened both in the siege and by sickness,1415. they resolved
to retreat towards Calais. In the mean while
the French had got together an Army which was four
times stronger than the English, which met them

near Agincourt, a Village in the County of st. Poll,
where a Battel being fought betwixt them,Battel of Agincourt. 
          6000
French were killed upon the spot, and a great number
taken Prisoners, among whom were a great many
persons of Quality. (The English Historians make
this Defeat much greater, it being rarely to be observed,
that the Historians of two Nations, who are at
Enmity, agree in their Relations. ) Yet the English
being extreamly tired, could not pursue the Victory. 
In the mean time the Invasion made by a Foreign
Enemy did in no ways diminish the intestine Divisions,
but rather augmented them: For the Duke of
Burgundy perceiving his Party in France to decline,
began to favour the English, who, in the Year next
following, landed again in Normandy, and had great
success. At last the Queen, who had hitherto had a
share in the Government, added Fuel to the Fire:
For the Constable d' Armagnac having now the sole Administration
of Affairs, and being only balanced by the
Authority of the Queen, took an opportunity, by the
free Conversation of the Queen, to put such a Jealousie
in the King's Head, that with the Consent of Charles
the Dauphin she was banished the Court. Which so
incensed the Queen, that she having conceived an implacable
Hatred against her son, sided with the Duke
of Burgundy, whose Party was thereby greatly
strengthened. Thus commenced the intestine Wars,
wherein both Parties were so exasperated against one
another, that they had little regard to the great success
of the English, who, in the mean time conquered
all Normandy and Roan it self. 1419. The Dauphin intending
at one blow to root out the Evil of these intestine
Commotions, cunningly invited the Duke of Burgundy
to come to an Agreement with him,The Duke of Burgundy assassinated. when at
their second meeting at Monterau, he caused him to
be killed. But this stroke had a quite contrary effect:
For the generality of the Nation abominated the fact,
and the Queen took from hence an Opportunity totally
to ruin her son, and to exclude him from the
succession. Wherefore, entring into a League with
the murthered Duke's son Philip, a Peace was concluded
with Henry V. King of England, by vertue of

which he was to marry Catharine, the Daughter of
Charles VI. and during his Life to be Regent of
France, and after his Death to be put into the full
possession of the Crown of France; That both the
Crowns of France and England should be united, yet
that each Kingdom should be ruled according to its
own Laws. Besides this, a sentence was pronounced
against the Dauphin in Paris, That by reason of the
Murther committed by him upon the Duke of Bargundy,
he was declared incapable of the Crown, and
that he for ever should be banished the Kingdom. He
appealed from this sentence to God and his sword,
and set his Court up at Poictiers, so that at that time
there was in France two Governments and two Courts. 
But the Affairs of the Dauphin were in a very ill condition,
very few of the Provinces siding with him;
those that did, were Anjou, Poictou, Tours, Auvergne,
Berry and Languedock, but all of them mightily exhausted
of Money. But it was happy for him, that
the brave King Henry V. died in the very Flower of
his Age and good Fortune, as likewise did, not long
after,1422. 
         Charles VI. whose Life (by the Infirmities of
his Mind, being incapable of governing the Kingdom)
had greatly obstructed the Welfare of the Kingdom. §. 13. Charles VII. 
         Charles VII. whom we hitherto have called
the Dauphin, caused himself, immediately after his Father's
Death, to be proclaimed King, with the Assistance
of the Bravest among the French, nevertheless
his Affairs at the beginning were under very ill
Circumstances: For the Duke of Bedford, who was
constituted Regent in France, having caused young
Henry VI. of England to be proclaimed King of France
in Paris,
         Henry VI. of England proclaimed King of France. in conjunction with the Dukes of Burgundy
and Britainy, tried all ways to expell him quite out of
France. His Forces were several times miserably
beaten by the English, the greatest part of the Cities
abandoned him, so that the English used to call him,
in derision, the King of Bourges, because he used commonly
to reside there. He was at last become so poor
that he rarely could dine in Publick, and it was observed,

that one time he had nothing for his Dinner
but a piece of roasted Mutton and a couple of Fowls. 
Besides this, most of the great Men about him being
dissatisfied with the ambitious Proceedings of the
Constable Richmond, had left the Court, and were
driving on their own Intrigues. Misunderstandings betwixt the English and the Duke of Burgundy the only Advantage Charles had left. The only Comfort
left to Charles was, that there was a misunderstanding
betwixt the English and the Duke of Burgundy;
else, if they had with their joint Forces vigorously attacked
Charles, he, in all probability could not have
held out long against them. The occasion happened
thus; Jaqueline Countess of Hennegau, Holland, Zealand
and Friesland, being divorced from her Husband,
John Duke of Brabant, a Cousin of the Duke of Burgundy,
was married again to the Duke of Gloucester,
Brother of Henry V. The Duke of Burgundy taking
his Cousin's part, it caused great Heart-burning betwixt
him and the Duke of Gloucester. The Duke
of Bedford endeavoured to appease them, yet did the
Duke of Burgundy from that time entertain a Grudge
against the English; which encreased afterwards, when
the English refused to put the City of Orleans into
the Hands of the Duke of Burgundy. This City being
besieged by the English was reduced to the utmost
Extremity; the French, which attacked a Convoy
which was going to the English Camp, having been
entirely beaten: Which Engagement is called la journée
des Haranes, or, the Battel of the Herrings. 
Charles's Affairs were then become so desperate that
he had resolved to retire into Dauphine, when upon a
sudden an unlooked for help was sent him: For a
Country Maid born in Lorraine,
         The Maid of Orleans. 
          whose Name was
Joan, did pretend that she was sent from God to relieve
Orleans, and to see the King crowned at Rheims. 
Both which she effected, striking thereby great terrour
into the English; whereas, on the other side, the
French being greatly encouraged by this success, saw
their Affairs from henceforward mend every day. But
this poor Wench following the Wars longer, as it
seems, than she had in Commission, was taken Prisoner
making a sally out of Compeigne, and being delivered
to the English,
         1431. was with great dishonour

burnt as a Witch at Roan. 
         The English Power declines in France. 
          The English, perceiving
their Affairs not to go so forward as formerly, resolved
to give them new Life and Vigour, by bringing over
the young King Henry, and having him crowned in
Paris: And to keep fair with the Duke of Burgundy
they gave him the Counties of Brie and Champaigne;
yet all this proved insufficient. The War therefore
having been thus carried on for several Years only
with light skirmishes, both Parties being tired out, a
Treaty was at last proposed by Mediation of the Pope
at Arras; but the English rigorously insisting upon
their Pretensions, which were very hard, they were
deserted by the Duke of Burgundy, who made a separate
Peace with Charles upon very advantageous Conditions. 
There befell also the English another Misfortune
by the Death of the Duke of Bedford,
         1435. who hitherto
had administred the Affairs in France with
great Prudence. After this the Cities of France surrendered
themselves one after another to Charles;
among which was Paris, which submitted it self to
its natural Lord. 1436. But because the English had made
miserable havock throughout France, and the French
souldiers themselves being ill paid, had committed
great Depredations, without any Order or Discipline,
a great Famine ensued, and afterwards a great Plague. 
It is related that the Wolves did snatch the Children
out of the streets of the suburbs of st. Anthony in
Paris. The War having been thus protracted for a
considerable time, a Truce was concluded for some
Years. The King, to be rid of the souldiers, sent
them into Alsace, under pretence to disturb the Council
at Basil. They killed at once 4000 swiss, but
having lost double the number soon after, returned
home again. In the mean time the English were degenerated
from their former Valour, their Forces
were extreamly diminished in France, and the souldiers
for want of Pay had given themselves over to
Plunder. They wanted good Officers, their Places
were not well provided, and their subjects weary of
the Government. England, at home, was divided
within it self, and the English weakened by two Overthrows,
which they had received from the scots. 

Charles therefore having met with this Opportunity,
resolved to beat the English at once out of France. 
He took, for a Pretence of the War, that they had
broken the Truce in Britainy and with the scots; and
attacking them with great Vigour in several places at
once,He drives the English out of France, 1449. he drove them, within the space of thirteen
Months, out of Normandy. The next Year after he
took from them Aquitain, Bayonne being the last
which surrendered it self;1451. so that the English had nothing
left on the Continent of France but Calais and
the County of Guines: Bourdeaux soon after revolted
from the French, and sought for Aid of the
English, but the brave Talbot having been killed in an
Engagement, it was retaken and re-united to the
French Crown,1453. after it had been 300 Years in the possession
of the English. Thus did this King re-unite the
mangled Kingdom, having expelled the English out
of its Bowels. Nevertheless he did not entirely enjoy
the Fruits of his good Fortune, living at variance
with his son, who for the space of thirteen Years came
not to Court. And being at last persuaded, that a
Design was formed against his Life, it so disturbed
him,1461. that for fear of being poisoned, he starved himself. §. 14. Him succeeded his son Lewis XI. a cunning,Lewis XI. 
resolute and malicious Prince, who laid the first Foundation
of the absolute Power since exercised by the
Kings of France, whereas formerly the Royal Power
was kept under by the Authority of the great Men of
the Kingdom. He reduces the excessive power of the Nobility. He began with reforming his Court
and Ministers according to his Pleasure: Of which the
great Men of the kingdom foreseeing the Consequence,
they entered into a League,A League against him. which they called, La
Ligue du bien public, the League for the publick good;
wherewith they pretended to defend the Publick against
the King's arbitrary Proceedings. Among these
were the Dukes of Burgundy and Britainy, who were
willing to keep the King within bounds. In the Year
1465, Charles, the young Duke of Burgundy, entered
France with an Army, and fought a Battel with the
King near Montlehery, wherein the Advantage was

near equal; but, because the King retreated a little
backwards the Night following, the Duke of Burgundy
pretended to have gained the Victory, which put
him upon those Enterprizes which afterwards cost him
his Life. The King's 〈◊〉 
           ••
           thods. The King extricated himself with a great
deal of Cunning out of this danger, for he released the
Taxes, and with great Promises and fine Words appeased
the People, all which, as soon as the danger
was passed, he revoked at pleasure. To dissolve the
knot of this Faction, he made Divisions betwixt the
most powerfull, the bravest he brought over to his
side by giving them particular Advantages, the rest he
ruined by his Policy, especially by bribing their Friends
and servants. And being in great want of Money,
he borrowed great summs of his servants, and such as
refused to lend, were put out of their Employments:
Which,The Original of selling the Offices of France. 
          'tis said, gave the first occasion, that the Offices
were afterwards sold in France. But the Duke
of Burgundy persisted in his Opposition, who had in
the Year 1468 hemed him in at Peronne, which danger
he however escaped. Duke of Burgundy slain. At last Lewis was rid of this his
troublesome Enemy, who had laid so many Designs
against him,1477. he being killed by the swiss near Nancy. 
Lewis taking advantage of the great Confusion, which
was occasioned by the Death of the Duke in that
Country, took possession of the Dukedom of Burgundy,
under pretext that the same was an Appanage, and
brought over to his side the Cities situated on the River
some, which had been under the Jurisdiction of
Charles. It was generally believed, That Lewis, by
way of Marriage, might easily have annexed the whole
Inheritance of this Duke unto France, if he had not
conceived such an implacable hatred against this House,
that he was resolved to ruin it. Two Years before the
Death of the Duke of Burgundy King Edward IV. 
landed with a great Army in France, whom Lewis
with Presents and fair Promises persuaded to return
home again. He united to the Crown Provence, Anjou
and Muns, having obtained the same by the last
Will and Testament of Charles d' Anjou, Count de
Maine, who was the last Male Heir of the House of
Anjou; notwithstanding that Rene Duke of Lorraine,
         
son of Ygland d' Anjou pretended a Right to the same
by his Mother's side. In his latter days he lived miserably,
and grew ridiculous, being in continual fear of
death. He died in the Year 1483. §. 15. Charles VIII. His son Charles VIII. had at the beginning
of his Reign his Hands full with the Duke of
Britainy, and was marching with an Army to unite
that Province by main force to the Crown. But understanding
that Maximilian of Austria had concluded
a Match betwixt Anna, the only Heiress of this
Dukedom and himself, the French King did think it
no ways adviseable to let such a delicious Morsel fall
to the share of the House of Austria, but obliged the
Bride, partly by force, partly by fair words, to renounce
Maximilian, and to be married to himself,
whereby this Country was united to France. And
tho' Henry VII. Britainy united to France, King of England, did not look with a
good Eye upon the growing Power of France,
         1491. and
therefore with a great Army besieged Boulogne, yet in
consideration of a good summ of Money he was prevailed
upon to return home again; especially, since
Maximilian (who had received a double affront from
Charles, who had not only taken his Bride from him,
but also had sent back his Daughter Margaret, which
was promised to him in Marriage) did not join his
Forces with him according to Agreement. Maximilian
took Arras and st. Omer, but being not able to
go further he consented, that his son Philip, Lord of
the Netherlands, might make a Truce with Charles. 
On the other side, Charles gave to Ferdinand the Catholick,
the Counties of Russilion and Cerdagne, some
say, to engage him thereby not to oppose his intended
Expedition against Naples. Others say, that Ferdinand
corrupted Charles's Confessour, to persuade him,
that he should restore that Country to its lawfull sovereign. 
France being thus by the Union with Britainy
become an entire Kingdom, it began to contrive
how to obtain the sovereignty over Italy. Charles
had a Pretension,An Expedition to Naples, end the Pre
           •••sions of it. because the Right and Title of the
Family of Anjo and Naples was by the Death of the
last Duke of Anjou and Earl of Provence devolved to

         Lewis XI. and consequently to himself. But this
young King received the greatest Encouragement from
Lewis sirnamed Morus, or the Black, Duke of Milan,
who, having Tuition of his Nephew John Galeas,
the true Heir of this Dukedom, but a weak Prince,
had under that Pretence made himself Master of the
same. This Duke fearing that he might be put out
of possession by Ferdinand King of Naples, whose
son Alfonsus's Daughter Isabella was married to John
Galeas, endeavoured to give Ferdinand his Hands full
of Work, that he might not be at leisure to think of
him; knowing also, that Ferdinand and his son Alfonsus
were much hated by their subjects for their Tyranny
and Impiety. An Expedition was therefore
undertaken against Naples,
         1494. which proved the occasion
of continual Miseries to Italy for the space of forty
Years; for so long it was the Cock-pit for the French,
Germans and spaniards, and at last lost a great part
of its ancient Liberty. Charles conquered Naples. It seemed to be fatal to Italy,
that the wise Italians either could or would not prevent
this Expedition, which was designed two Years
before. Charles had at the beginning all the success
imaginable, for the Italian Troops were in a very ill
condition, and there being no body who durst oppose
him, Florence and the Pope sided with him, the latter
declaring Charles King of Naples. King Alfonsus
stirred up by his own Conscience, abdicated himself,
transferring all his Right and Title upon his son Ferdinand:
But his Forces being soon beaten and dispersed,
Charles made his solemn Entry into Naples
with loud Acclamations. 1495. Immediately the whole
Kingdom submitted to him, except the Isle of Iseria,
and the Cities of Brundisi and Gallipoli. The Conquest
of so fair a Kingdom, and that within five
Months time, struck a Terrour into the Turkish Emperour
himself, being in fear at constantinople, and
Greece being ready to rebell as soon as the French
should land on that side. But the Face of Affairs
was quickly changed; for the French, by their ill behaviour
quickly lost the Favour of the Neapolitans;
the King minded nothing but Gaming, and the rest
following his Example, were careless in maintaining

their Conquest. Besides this, it was looked upon as
a thing of such Consequence by the rest of the Princes
of Europe,
         The League of Italy against the French. 
          that the Emperour, the Pope, King Ferdinand
of Arragon, Venice and Milan entered into a
Confederacy, to drive the French out of Italy;
Charles therefore fearing lest his Retreat might be cut
off, took his Way by Land into France, having left
things but in an indifferent state of Defence in Naples. 
In his March he was met by the Confederate Army
near the River of Taro, where a Battel was fought, in
which, tho' there were more killed on the Confederate
side than of the French,
         He los•th Naples. 
          yet he marched forward
with such Precipitation, as if he had lost the Battel. 
Charles was no sooner returned into France, but Ferdinand
soon retook, without great trouble, the Kingdom
of Naples, to the great Dishonour of the French,
who were not able to maintain themselves there a
whole Year, of whom very few returned alive into
France. Not long after Charles died without
Issue. 1498. 
        §. 16. Lewis XII. Him succeeded Lewis XII. formerly Duke
of Orleans, who, not to lose Britainy, married Anna
Widow of the late King. He made War soon after
on Milan, pretending a Right to that Dukedom by his
Grandmother's side, and having conquered the same
within 21 days. 1499. 
         Lewis the Black was forced to fly
with his Children and all his Treasure into Germany. 
         He conq•ers Milan. 
         
But the Inhabitants of Milan grew quickly weary of
the French, their free Conversation with the Women
being especially intolerable to them, and therefore recalled
their Duke, who having got together an Army
of swiss was joyfully received, and regained the whole
Country, except the Castle of Milan and the City of
Novara. But Lewis sending timely Relief, the
Duke's swiss souldiers refused to fight against the
French, so that the Duke endeavouring to save himself
by flight in a common souldiers Habit, was taken
Prisoner, and kept ten Years in Prison at Loches, where
he died. Thus the French got Milan and the City of
Genoua again. After so great success Lewis began to
think of the Kingdom of Naples: To obtain which,

he made a League with Ferdinand the Catholick,
         He conquers Naples. 
         
wherein it was agreed, that they should divide the
Kingdom betwixt them, so that the French should
have for their share Naples, Terre de Labour and Abruzze;
and the spaniards, Poville and Calabria. 
Each of them got his share without any great trouble,
Frederick King of Naples surrendring himself to King
Lewis,
         1501. who allowed him a yearly Pension of 30000
Crowns. But soon after new Differences arose betwixt
these two haughty Nations, concerning the
Limits; for the French pretended that the Country of
Capitanate (which is very considerable for its Taxes
paid for sheep, which are there in great numbers) did
belong to Abruzze, whereas the spaniards would
have it belong to Poville; and from Words they came
to Blows. The French, at first, had somewhat the
better; but as soon as Gonsalvus de Cordoua, that cunning
spaniard had broke their first Fury, and Lewis
did not send sufficient Relief,Loses it agai•. they were as shamefully
beaten again out of the Kingdom, as they had
been before. Lewis endeavoured to revenge himself
upon the spaniards in the Year next following,1503. but
tho' he attacked them with four several Armies, yet
could he not gain any thing upon them: Wherefore
he made a Peace with Ferdinand, and entered into an
Alliance with him against Philip son-in-law to Ferdinand,
who having, after the death of Isabella, taken
from him the Kingdom of Castile, was upheld by
his Father Maximilian, and backed by Henry King of
England, whose son had married his Wife's sister. In
the Year 1507, the City of Genoua rebelled against
Lewis, but was soon reduced to her former Obedience. 
Then the War began afresh in Italy,
         The Venetian War. with the
Venetians, who being too much addicted to self-interest,
had drawn upon themselves the hatred of all
their Neighbours, having encroached upon every one
of them; and Lewis especially attributed to them his
loss of the Kingdom of Naples. To humble this
proud state a League was concluded at Cambray,
         Lewis joins in the League against th••. betwixt
the Emperour, the Pope, the Kings of France
and spain. 
         1508. 
         Lewis, by entring into a Confederacy
with his mortal Enemies, had more regard to his

Passion than his Interest, it being certain that he
might upon all occasions have trusted to the Friendship
of the Venetians. But now he was the first that
fell upon them,1509. and defeated them in a great Battel
near Giera d' Addua, which caused such a Terror among
them, that they left all what they had on the
Continent, within twenty days, and if Lewis had pursued
his Victory whilst they were under this first Consternation,
he might doubtless have put a period to
their Greatness. But in the mean time that he marched
back towards Milan, not making the best of his
Victory, they got leisure to recover themselves; especially
since the Emperour Maximilian was not in
earnest against them, and Pope Julius II. was reconciled
to them. A League against Lewis. 
          Nay, in the Year 1510, the Pope,
Ferdinand, Henry VIII. and the swiss Cantons, denounced
War against Lewis. For the Pope could not
look with a good Eye upon the growing Power of
France in Italy, Ferdinand feared lest Lewis might
attack Naples, and Henry being come lately to the
Crown, was for making himself famous by so great
an Undertaking; the swiss were set against France,
because Lewis had not paid them their old Arrears,
and had refused to encrease their Pension, not because
their Demands were extravagant, but because he
would not be out-braved by them. In this War the
French General Gasto de Foix behaved himself very
gallantly; for he relieved Bononia, beat the Venetian
Army, killed 8000 of them in Brescia, and obtained
a glorious Victory against the Confederate Army near
Ravenna;
         1512. in which Battel, nevertheless, this brave
General, being too hot in pursuing the Enemy, was
slain. With his death the French Affairs began to decline,
and they were again forced to leave Italy. 
Maximilian, son of Lewis the Black was restored to
his Dutchy of Milan by the help of the swiss: The
Genoucse revolted, and made sanus Fregosus their
Duke. Ferdinand the Catholick took from King John
the Kingdom of Navarre, which the French in vain
endeavoured to regain from the spaniards. But Lewis
being extreamly desirous to regain Milan entered
into a League with Venice,
         He conquers Milan agai•n. and retook most places of

that Dukedom and the City of Genoua. He besieged
Duke Maximilian in the Castle of Novara, but the
swiss coming to the Assistance of the Duke, attacked
the French with incredible Fury in their Camp, and
drove them quite out of the whole Dukedom, which
was twice taken in one Month. He is attacked by several Princes at once. Then Lewis was at
one time attacked by the Emperour, England, and
the swiss; and if the English and the swiss had joined,
France would have run a great Risque: But King
Henry, in lieu of entring into the Heart of France, lost
his Time at the siege of Terou•ne, where he defeated
the French, that were come to its Relief, near Guinegast;
this Battel was called La journée des esperons,
or The Battel of the spurs, because the French made
better use of their spurs than their swords; and after
he had taken Tournay, he returned into England. The
swiss, who kept the Duke of Tremoville besieged,
were bought off with 600000 Crowns, which were
promised to them by the Duke without the King's
Order, as likewise, that he should renounce the Council
of Pisa and his Pretensions to the Dukedom of Milan. 
Which shamefull Agreement the King refused
to ratify; and if the swiss had not been more fond of
the Ransom offered for the Hostages than their Blood,
they had paied with their Lives for it. In the Year
next following Lewis made a Peace with the King of
England, who gave him his sister Mary in Marriage;
which young Lady, 'tis thought, did hasten the Death
of the old King, which ensued in the beginning of the
Year 1515. This King was so well beloved by his
People, that he was generally called, Le Pere du
Peuple, or The Father of the People. 
        §. 17. His Nephew Francis I. succeeded him,Francis 1. who
having made a League with England, the Archduke
Charles and Venice, entered upon a sudden into Italy,
and took Genoua and some other Places without great
Opposition; but being encamped near Marignano,
within a League of Milan, the swiss unexpectedly
fell upon him, where a bloody Fight ensued. The
swiss were at last repulsed, and found that they could
be beaten, having lost above 10000; but the French
         
also left 4000 of their best Men upon the spot. After
this Maximilian surrendered himself and the whole
Country to the King, on the Condition of an annual
Pension of 30000 Ducats to be paid him. soon after
the King agreed with the swiss, whom in Consideration
of a good summ, he brought again into an Alliance
with France. He made also an Agreement with Pope
Leo X. by vertue of which the King was to have the
Right of naming Bishops and Abbots, but the Pope to
keep certain Benefits out of the chiefest Church Benefices. 
In the Year 1518, he redeemed Tournay form
the English for a good summ of Money. He aspires to the Empire. In the Year
next following, after the Death of the Emperor
Maximilian, Francis emploied all his Engines to be
exalted to the Imperial Dignity; but the German
Princes fearing lest the French should endeavour to
humble them, and for some other Considerations, preferred
before him Charles V. This proved the Occasision
of great Jealousies betwixt these two Princes; for
Francis being very sensible what great Advantages he
had gained by the Imperial Dignity, put himself into
a good posture, to prevent his becoming Master of
him and all the rest of the Princes in Europe. This Jealousie
broke at last out into an open War,In a few Days he takes and loses the Kingdom of Navarre. 
          
         Francis endeavouring
to re-take Navarre from the spaniards, as
thinking to have met with a fair Opportunity, whilst
the Divisions in spain were on Foot. The French conquered
that Kingdom in a few days time, but being not
carefull enough to preserve it, as easily lost it again. 
soon after the War was kindled in the Netherlands,
         1521. 
occasioned by Robert Van de Marck, Lord of sedan,
whom Francis took into his Protection. This Robert
was so puft up with the French Protection, that he
writ a Letter of Defiance to the Emperour, and fell
into the Country of Luxemburgh. But Charles quickly
chastised this petty Enemy; and being persuaded
that Francis had encouraged him thereunto, he took
from him st. Amand and Tournay, The Business nevertheless
might have been composed at the beginning,
if the French had not insisted upon keeping Fonterabia,
which in the mean time had been surprised by
them. A War 〈◊〉 in Italy. 
          But the hardest task was in Italy, both the

Emperour and Pope being willing to drive Francis
out of Milan, and to restore Francis sforza. 
They effected both with good success, for the French
Army was not timely supplied with Money, and being,
besides this, beaten near Bicoque, the French
were again driven out of Milan and Genoua. 
         The French driven out of Milan, 1521. And
on the other side they also lost Fonterabia. But what
happened very ill to Francis, was, That the Constable
Charles of Bourbon went over to the Emperour;The Duke of Bourbon revolts to the Emperour. the
Reason of which was, That he had been for a while
mightily kept under by the Queen Mother, the Chancellour
Duprat, and Admiral Bonnivet. The first
had commenced a suit at Law against him about the
Dukedom of Bourbon, which he despaired to be able
to maintain against so strong a Party, as believing
that the King was underhand concerned in the Matter. 
'Tis said, that the first Cause of this Difference
was, because the Duke of Bourbon had refused to marry
her. The Duke of Bourbon therefore had agreed
with the Emperor and the King of England, That
they should divide the Kingdom of France betwixt
them; the Kingdom of Arelat and the Emperour's
sister having been promised to the Duke of Bourbon. 
But the Design being discovered the Duke of Bourbon
was forced to fly into Italy. 
         1524. Notwithstanding the
English had made an Inrode into Picardy, Francis sent
again an Army into the Milaneze, under the Command
of the Admiral Bonnivet, which was beaten
back with considerable loss by the Duke of Bourbon. 
This Bonnivet persuaded the King to go in Person into
Italy, with this prospect, that if Things succeeded
well, he should have the Glory of having been the
Adviser, but if they succeeded ill, the Misfortune would
be covered by the King's Person. Francis therefore
went with a good Resolution into Italy, because he
saw the Duke of Bourbon, who in the mean time having
entered Provence, had besieged Marseilles, did retreat
before him, and having laid siege to Pavia, he
for two Months together harrassed his Army in that
siege. In the mean while the Imperialists drew their
Forces together, and marched against him (who was
encamped in the Parks) with an Intention either to

sight him,Franc's desired at the Battel of Pavia, and taken Prisoner, or to relieve Pavia. Francis engaged with
them in a Battel, but was defeated and taken Prisoner. 
And thus the French were again driven out of Italy. 
Francis was carried into spain, and kept very
hardly,1525. so that he fell sick for Grief; which hastened
his Liberty, it being feared that he might die through
Vexation. Besides that, England and the Italian
Princes entered into a Confederacy to hinder the growing
Power of Charles. The Conditions upon which
he obtained his Liberty we have touched upon in another
place; but besides this, Francis gave his Parole
of Honour, if the said Conditions were not fulfilled,
That he would return a Prisoner. He is set at Liberty on hard Conditions, which he did not perform. But the wiser sort
did sufficiently foresee, that Francis would not perform
the Agreement, wherefore Gattinata the Chancellour
refused to sign the Treaty, alledging, That
Charles could get nothing else by this Treaty but the
implacable Hatred of the French, and to be ridiculed
by every Body; that he had been bubbled and disappointed
in his covetous Designs. And Francis having
obtained his Liberty after thirteen Months Imprisonment,
pretended, That what had been done was done
in Prison, and contrary to his Coronation Oath which
he had taken at Rheims; That the Kingdom was not
in his disposal, he having only the use of the same for
Life. The same was alledged by the Estates, and
especially, by the Burgundians, who would in no ways
consent to be separated from the Crown of France. If
Charles was so much for having Burgundy, he ought
to have taken care to have been put into possession of
the same, before he set Francis at liberty. As soon
as Francis had got his Liberty, he made it his first
Business to renew the League with England and the
Italian states. He with the King of England declare War against the Emperour. And the new Treaty having proved
fruitless which was set on foot with the Emperour,
both Kings denounced War against him. Charles afterwards
accusing Francis of not having kept his Parole,
the latter gave the first the Lye, sending him
also a Challenge, which Matters were looked upon by
the World as very unbecomming the Grandeur of such
Princes. He sends an 〈◊〉 my into Italy. 
         Francis sent, after this, an Army into Italy
under the Command of Odet de Foix Lautree, which

having made considerable progresses in the Milaneze,
entered the Kingdom of Naples, and having taken
a great many places there, laid siege before the Capital
City it self. But the French Affairs received the
first shock there, when Andrew Doria, the Admiral,
leaving the French side, went over to the Emperour,
he being dissatisfied that the King had refused to conferr
upon him the Government of his Native City
Genoua, and to restore to the Genouese, savona. This
Doria is deservedly praised, for that, when he might
have been Lord of his Native Country, he chose rather
to procure its Liberty, which it enjoys to this
Day. But Doria leaving the French side, was the occasion
that the City of Naples could not be cut off of
their Communication by sea. And the Plague began
to reign in the Army during this long siege, which
devoured the greatest part of it, and the General himself. 
The Remnants of the Army were miserably
treated, the Officers being made Prisoners, and the
common souldiers disarmed; the French were also
obliged to quit Milan and Genoua. At last, the Emperour
having obtained his Aim, and Francis being very
desirous to see his Children at Liberty again,Peace made at Cambray. 
          a Peace was
concluded betwixt them at Cambray, by vertue of
which,1529. 
         Francis paied two Millions of Ducats as a
Ransom for his sons, and renounced the sovereignty
over Flanders, Artois, Milan and Naples. And this
was all the Benefit which this King and his Predecessours
had reapt from the Italian Wars. 1535. Nevertheless,
some Years after,The War breaks out afresh. the War began afresh, at which time
Francis found a new way to make himself Master of
the Milaneze, by first securing to himself the Dukedom
of savoy. Wherefore he made Pretensions upon
Charles Duke of savoy concerning the Inheritance of
his Mother, descended out of the House of savoy, and
for some other Reasons he fell upon him, and took most
of his strong Holds. In the mean time died Francis
sforza Duke of Milan, wherefore the Emperour was
resolved to annex this Country to his House, but Francis
could by no means digest the loss of it. Charles
therefore entered Provence in person with an Army of
40000 Foot and 16000 Horse, ransacked Aix and besieged

         Marseilles, which however he could not take,
his Army being in a Month's time greatly diminished
by sickness. An Army of 30000 Men also entered Picardy
from the Netherlands, which took Guise, but
was beaten from before Peronne; yet afterwards took
st. Pol and Monstrevil. Francis summoned the Emperour
before him as his Vassal concerning Flanders
and Artois, alledging, that the sovereignty of these
Provinces was inseparable from the Crown, and made
an Alliance with the Turks. The first seemed to be
very ridiculous to most People, the last very unbecoming
a Christian Prince. The French however reply,
That this Alliance was eagerly sought for by the
Emperour himself. At last, by the Mediation of the
Pope,The Truce prolonged for nine Years. the Truce which was the Year before made at
Nissa in Provence was prolonged for nine Years, and
these two great Rivals gave afterwards one another a
Visit at Aigues Mortes. And when in the Year next
following the City of Ghent rebelled, Charles had such
a Confidence in Francis, that he took his Journey
through France, tho' Charles in the mean while had
cunningly given Francis some Hopes of the Recovery
of Milan; which however afterwards he would not
acknowledge, because upon the Persuasions of the Constable
Montmorency, the King had not taken from
him any security under his Hand during his stay in
Paris; which some alledge to be one reason why
Montmorency afterwards fell into Disgrace. But the
Truce was broke again,Francis breaks the Truce, under pretence, That the Governour
of Milan had caused to be killed Caesar Fregosus
and Anthony Rinco the Ambassadours of Francis,
         1542. 
as they were going along the River Po in their Way to
Venice, the first of whom was to have gone from
thence to Constantinople, Francis thought to have
met now with a fair Opportunity, because Charles had
suffered a considerable loss before Algier. He therefore
attacked the Emperour with five several Armies at
once. But the strongest of all, which lay before Perpignan
did nothing, the second took some Places in the
Country of Luxemburgh. The Emperour solyman also
made a great Diversion in Hungary, taking Gran
and some other Places. The great Pyrate Barbarossa
         
arrived in Prevence with his Fleet, but did more mischief
than good to France, But Charles, on the other
hand, made an Alliance with Henry VIII. who was
dissatisfied with Francis, because he had taken part
with the scots, and would not renounce his Obedience
to the Pope. He, after he had beat the Duke of
Cleves, who depended on the French, besieged Landrecy
with a great Army, but to no purpose. In the
mean time the French had obtained a most signal Victory
over the Imperial Forces near Cerisolles in Piedmont. 
But the King could not prosecute his Victory,
being obliged to recall his Troops, because the Emperour
and Henry King of England had made an Agreement
with an Army of 80000 Foot and 22000
Horse, to fall into France; the first by the Way of
Champagne, the second by the Way of Picardy, to
join their Forces near Paris, to ransack the City and
all the adjacent Countries as far as to the River Loire. 
The Emperour took by the Way Luxemburgh, lay six
Weeks before Disier, got abundance of Provision in
Espernay and Chasteau Thierry, which put the whole
City of Paris into a great Consternation; and no small
Danger seemed to threaten that City, if King Henry
had joined his Forces in time, according to his Promise:
But he losing his Time in the sieges of Boulogne
and Monstrevil,
         A Peace concluded at Crespy, 1544. 
         Charles hearkened to a Peace, which
was concluded at Crespy. By vertue of this Peace all
the Places were restored, and the Emperour promised
to the Duke of Orleans, the second son of the King,
either his or his Brother's Daughter in Marriage, and
to give for her Dowry either Milan or the Netherlands;
which was not performed, because the said
Duke died in the Year next following. 1546. 
         Francis also
made a Peace with England, under Condition that he
should have liberty to redeem Boulogne for a certain
summ of Money. He died in the Year 1547. §. 18. Henry II. Him succeeded his son Henry II. to whom
fell the Marquisate of saluzze,
         1548. as a Fief of Dauphine,
the last Marquiss Gabriel dying without Issue. 1549. He severely
chastized the City of Bourdeaux, which had rebelled
against him. 1550. In the Year next following he

redeemed Boulogne for a certain summ of Money from
the English. In the Year 1551, the Emperour being
engaged in a War against the Turks, and the German
Princes being very jealous of his Greatness, Henry
thought to have met with a fit Opportunity to break
with him. He began therefore in the Netherlands
and Piedmont; and having made an Alliance with
Maurice Elector of saxony,
         His Expedition into Germany, 1552. he marched with his Army
towards the Rhine, and surprized by the Way the
Cities of Metz, Toul and Verdun, and would have
done the same with strasbourgh, if they had not been
upon their Guard there. But the Elector of saxony
having made a Peace with the Emperour without including
the King, and some Princes intreating him
not to advance farther into the Empire he marched
back into the Country of Luxembourgh, where he took
some Places. The Emperour then besieged Metz with
an Army of 100000 Men, but the Duke of Guise defended
himself so bravely, that the Emperour was
obliged to raise the siege with great loss. To revenge
this Affront, he attacked Terouëne in Artois with great
Fury, and rased to the Ground this Fortress, which
had proved hitherto so troublesome to the Netherlands. 
The same he did to Hesdin, both the Garrisons
being put to the sword. On the other side the French
took siena in Italy, and several Places in the Island of
Corsica,
         1555. but were again beaten out of siena, after they
had been mauled near Marciano. 
         A Truce between Charles V. and Henry II. 
          In the Year 1556,
a Truce was concluded at Vaucelles near Cambray, the
Emperour being desirous to leave the Kingdom to his
son (to whom he had surrendered the same) in Peace. 
But the Truce was scarce confirmed by Oath, when
the French, upon the Instigation of Pope Paul IV. 
broke the same again, who having some Differences
with spain persuaded Henry to take his part. The
Duke of Guise was therefore sent into Italy with an
Army, but did nothing worth mentioning. In the
mean time King Philip had gathered an Army of 50000
Men, hoping thereby to establish his Reputation in
the beginning of his Reign, and having also drawn
England into the War, he besieged st. Quintin, into
which place the Admiral Gaspar Coligny had thrown

himself. The Constable Montmorency advanced with
an Army to the Relief of the Place, but retreating again
in sight of the Enemies, they fell upon him, and
gave him a terrible Defeat. 1557. 
         France had been then in
the utmost danger, if this Victorious Army had
marched directly towards Paris, and if the Enemies
Design upon Lyons had not miscarried. But King Philip
feared least the Duke of savoy, who commanded his
Army, might take this Opportunity to reconcile himself
to France upon some advantageous Conditions;
wherefore he would not let him march on far into the
Country, but took st. Quintin by storm, and lost his
Time in the taking of Han, Chastelet and Noyon. This
gave leisure to the French to recollect themselves, and
having recalled the Duke of Guise out of Italy, they
retook Calais, and those few other places which remained
under the English thereabouts, as likewise
Thionville in the Year 1559. A Project to unite scotland with France misscarried. In the same Year a Project
was set on foot, to unite the Kingdom of scotland
with France, by a Marriage betwixt Queen Mary and
the Dauphine Francis; but the same miscarried, no
Children being born of them. The Mareschal de
Fermes, who made an Inrode into Flanders was soundly
beaten near Gravelingen. At last a Peace was concluded
at Chasteau en Cambresis, which proved very
pernicious for France; because, for the Castle of Cambray,
the Cities of Han, Chastelet and st. Quintin, there
were not only 198 Places redelivered to spain, and
the Duke of savoy restored, but also this Peace was
partly the Occasion of those intestine Wars, which afterwards
miserably tore in pieces the Kingdom of
France. It was also resolved in France not to intermeddle
any more in the Italian Affairs, and to dissolve
the Alliance with the Turks. After this Peace was
concluded Henry was killed in a Turnament, a splinter
of a broken Lance having got into his Eye; for
the King had challenged the Earl of Montgomery to
run against him with an open Vizier, and as soon
as he was wounded he lost both his senses and
speech, and died within eleven days. By this Accident,
the Wedding which he celebrated for his
sister Margaret, which was married to Chilibert Emanuel
         
Duke of savoy, was very mournfully consummated. §. 19. Francis II. Him succeeded his son Francis II. under
whose Reign the French Divisions began to break out
with Fury in their own Bowels, which continued near
40 Years, whereas formerly the violent Heat of this
Nation had been quelled, partly by the Wars with the
English, partly by the several Expeditions undertaken
against Italy. 
         The Causes of the intestine Wars of France. 
          Concerning the Causes of these
Intestine Wars, it is to be observed, That after the
House of Valois came to the Crown, the next in
Blood were those of the House of Bourbon, which
House was grown so Potent, by its Riches, Power
and Authority of a great many brave Persons, which
descended from it, that the preceding Kings were
grown extreamly jealous of it. And, tho' Francis I. 
at the beginning of his Reign did constitute the Duke
of Bourbon Constable; yet being soon convinced afterwards,
of the Reasons which had induced his Ancestors
to keep under this House, he used all his Endeavours
to humble the said Charles of Bourbon. For
this Reason he entered into a Conspiracy against Francis,
which having been discovered, he went over to
Charles V. and commanded as General in the Battel
near Pavia, where Francis was taken Prisoner, and
was slain in the storming of Rome. 
         1527. By his Death the
House of Bourbon received a great blow, those who
were left being looked upon with a very ill Eye, tho'
they kept themselves very quiet to extinguish the suspicion
and Hatred conceived against them. The House
of Bourbon being thus brought very low, the two
Houses of Montmorency and Guise held up their Heads
under the Reign of Francis I. The first was one of
the most ancient in France; the latter was a Branch
of the House of Lorrain. The Head of the first was
Annas Montmorency, Constable of France; of the latter
Claude Duke of Guise. Both of them were in
great Favour and Authority with Francis I. but both
fell into Disgrace at the latter end of his Reign, being
banished the Court. It is related of Francis I. that
just before his Death he advised his son Henry to consult

with neither of them in his Affairs, since too great
and too able Ministers proved often dangerous. Yet
notwithstanding this, Henry II. did receive both Annas
Montmorency and Francis de Guise, the son of
Claude, into his particular Favour; who quickly grew
jealous of one another, the first taking much upon
him because of his Experience in state Affairs, and
Gravity, the latter being puffed up with the Glory of
Martial Exploits,The House of Guise rises, and that of Bourbon declines. and the Applause of the People; the
Authority of the Duke of Guise was greatly encreased
after he had repulsed Charles V. from before Metz,
and taken Calais; whereas the unfortunate Battel
fought near st. Quintin, and the ensuing dishonourable
Peace were very prejudicial to Montmorency,
But the House of Guise got the greatest Advantage,
after Francis II. had married Mary Queen of scotland,
whose Mother was sister to the Duke of Guise: so
that during the Reign of Francis II. the Duke of
Guise and the Cardinal his Brother, were the Men
that bore the greatest sway in the Kingdom; which
extreamly exasperated Montmorency and the two Brothers
of Bourbon, Anthony King of Navarre, and the
Prince of Conde, seeing themselves thus neglected. 
And tho' Anthony was of a very modest Behaviour,
watching only an Opportunity to regain his Kingdom
of Navarre from the spaniards, and having a sufficient
Revenue out of his Country of Bearn, wherewithal to
maintain himself; yet the Prince of Conde was Ambitious,
Poor, and of a turbulent spirit, who was not able
to maintain his Grandeur without some considerable
Employment. Besides this, he was continually stirred up
by the Admiral Gaspar Coligny, an ambitious, cunning
and fly Man; who, as his Enemies will have it, was very
forward to fish in troubled Waters; his Brother d' Andelot
also being of a very wild and turbulent spirit. 
These three only watched an Opportunity to raise
Commotions in the Kingdom. Thus the great Men
of the Kingdom were divided into these several Factions,
at the Time when Francis II. began his Reign, a
Prince scarce sixteen Years old, weak both in Body
and Mind, and therefore incapable to rule the Kingdom
by himself. several therefore pretended to have

a right to the Administration of the Government,Divisions about the Administration of the Government. 
these of Bourbon, as being the next Princes of the
Blood; the House of Guise, as being nearly related to
the Queen, and the Queen Mother Catharine de Medicis,
the very pattern of an aspiring and cunning Woman,
hoped, That whilst the Princes were in contest
about the Administration of the Government, it would
fall to her share, wherefore she always fomented the
Divisions, by keeping up the Balance betwixt them. 
This Catharine first sided with the House of Guise, dividing
the Administration of Affairs with them, so
that she was to have the supream Administration, the
Duke of Guise was to manage the Military Affairs,
and his Brother the Cardinal the Finances. This Agreement
being made betwixt them, the Constable,
under pretence of his old Age was dismissed from Court,
and the Prince of Conde sent as Ambassadour into spain. 
These, who were thus excluded, had a meeting, to
consider which way they might free themselves from
these Oppressions, where it was resolved that the King
of Navarre should intercede for them at Court; who
being put off with fair words and empty Promiess, set
himself at rest. Conde was resolved to try his Fortune
by force; but having not a sufficient Interest, Coligny
advised him, he should side with the Huguenots (for so
they call•d in France those who professed the Protestant
Religion) who laboured then under a severe Persecution
and wanted a Head, under whose Conduct
they might obtain the free Exercise of their Religion:
Besides that, they mortally hated those of Guise,
whom they supposed to be the Authors of their Persecution. 
The Business was thus concerted; That
the Huguenots should assemble in private, and some of
them by a humble Petition to request the free Exercise
of their Religion at Court; which, if it should be
refused, the rest should be at hand, to kill those of
Guise, and to force the King to receive, the Prince of
Conde for his chief Minister of state. The Execution
of this Design was undertaken by a certain Gentleman
called Renaudie; but the Enterprize being deferred for
some time, because the Court went from Blois to Amboise,
it was discovered, and thereby rendered inpracticable,

above twelve hundred that were taken paying
with their Lives for it; Conde was also sent to Prison,
and was just upon the point of receiving sentence of
Death, when Francis II. after a very short Reign,
died suddenly of an Ulcer in the Head,1560. which caused
great Alterations in the Affairs of the Kigdom. §. 20. Charles IX. Him succeeded his Brother Charles IX. then
scarce eleven Years old, whose Tuition his Mother Catharine
took immediately upon her self, hoping to enjoy
it quietly, whilst the Houses of Bourbon and Guise
were engaged in mutual Quarrels; wherefore she was
very carefull to uphold these Jealousies betwixt them. 
To find an Opportunity to set up the Prince of Conde
and his Party, thereby to balance those of Guise, she
pretended to be no Enemy to the Protestant Religion,
under which Pretence the same was much in request
at Court. To suppress the reformed Religion,
Montmorency, the House of Guise, and the Mareschaal
of st. Andrew, joined in a Confederacy, who calling
themselves the Triumvirate, drew also the King of
Navarre in to their Party. The Conferenec of Poissy. 
          After this a Conference
and Disputation was held betwixt some Divines of both
Religions at Poissy, after which, the Royal Protection
was by a publick Edict, promised to the Protestant
Religion;1562. which from the Month is called the Edict
of January. This extreamly exasperated the Triumvirate,
so that in the very same Year the War commenced. The first Huguenot war. 
The first occasion of it was given by some
belonging to those of Guise, who in a small Town
called Vassy, disturbed the Protestants in the Exercise
of their Religion; and a Quarrel arising thereupon,
killed near threescore of them: Which was the first
Blood shed in this Civil War; and from this time
Things went very strangely in France. It is not our
purpose to enumerate all the Cities that were taken,
neither to speak of all the small skirmishes which are
innumerable, nor the Cruelties committed on both
sides, and the Barbarities of the Rabble; it will be
sufficient for us to touch upon some of the main points. 
In this first War the King of Navarre died of a Wound,
which he received in the siege of Roan, Near Dreux
         
a bloody Battel was fought, where Conde at first had
the Advantage, but his souldiers falling to plundring,
he was beat back again, he himself being made a Prisoner,
and the Mareschal st. Andrew being killed by a
shot, 8000 Men were slain upon the spot, and the Loss
near equal on both sides; the Duke of Guise kept the
Field, but was afterwards, at the siege of Orleans, treacherously
murthered by one Poltrot, with a Pistol-shot,
who was supposed to have committed the Fact by instigation
of Coligny. soon after a Peace was made. 
It is related,1563. that above 50000 Huguenots were slain
in this War; on the other side, they took the Churchplate
and Ornaments, which they having turned into
Money, silver was after this War more currant in
France than before. But Catharine had persuaded her
self, that both Parties were reduced to that Condition,
that she could now handle them at pleasure. After
the Peace was concluded the English were again beaten
out of Havre de Grace, which the Huguenots had given
them as an Acknowledgment for their Assistance. This
Peace lasted no longer than till the Year 1576, when the
Huguenots were persuaded, that at the interview betwixt
Catharine and the Duke of Alba at Bayonne, a League was
set on foot for rooting out the Hereticks: And in effect,
they were immediately after more severely dealt with,
and, as it was reported, the Prince of Conde and Coligny
were to be secured. The second War. The Huguenots therefore began
the second War, during which, the Constable
Annas Montmorency being mortally wounded in an
Engagement, he told a Monk, who at his last Hour
was very troublesome to him; He should let him be at
quiet, since during the Time of 80 Years that he had
lived, he had learned how to employ one quarter of an
Hour in dying. The Huguenots got great Reputation
for Valour in this Engagement, they being much Inferiour
to the other in Number. About the same time
the City of Rochelle declared for the Huguenots, which
afterwards for 60 Years together served them for a secure
Retreat. 1568. Then a second Peace was concluded,
not with an Intention to keep it, but that each Party
might find a better Opportunity to take Advantage
of one another; nor were the Conditions ever fulfilled. 

The War therefore was renewed in the same Year,The Third War during
which the Prince of Conde was killed by a shot,1569. in
a Battel near Jarnack. 
         The Prince of Conde being slain, the King of Navarre is declared Head of the Huguenots. 
          After his Death the Huguenots
declared Henry King of Navarre, the son of Anthony,
who afterwards was King of France, their Head, tho
in effect Coligny had the chief management of Affairs. 
He in vain besieged Poictiers, in the Defence of which
Place the young Duke of Guise gave the first proofs of his
Valour; he was also soundly beaten near Moncontour,
where he lost 9000 Foot. He lost nevertheless nothing
of his former Reputation, for he quickly recollected
his broken Troops, and got together a great Army,
being assisted by Queen Elizabeth with Money, and
by the Paltzgrave with souldiers. 1570. He directed his
March towards Paris, whereupon a Peace was concluded
to the great Advantage of the Huguenots, the
four strong Cities of Rochelle, Montauban, Cagnac and
Charité being given them for their security: But the
main design of this Peace was, that the King perceiving,
that the Huguenots could not be suppressed
by Force, hoped he might win them by Policy, therefore
endeavoured by fair Words and great Promises to
make them secure. The Admiral was caressed at Court,
he being consulted withall concerning an Expedition
to be undertaken against the spaniards in the Netherlands. 
A Marriage also was concluded betwixt
Henry King of Navarre and Margaret the King's sister,
to which Wedding they invited the chief of the
Huguenots,
         The Parisian Massacre, with a Design to cut their Throats in Paris. 
And first of all the Admiral Coligny, as he was
going home from Court, was by sorne Villains, who
were suborned by the Duke of Guise, shot with two
Bullets through the Arm. Then it was agreed, That
in the Year 1571, on the 24th Day of August, early
in the Morning, when the Bells were ringing to Prayers,
all the Huguenots should be massacred, except the
King of Navarre and the young Prince of Conde:
The Execution of this Enterprize the Duke of Guise
had taken upon himself. The beginning of whose
Massacre was made with Coligny, who was ill of his
Wounds; then it fell promiscuously upon the rest,
the Fury of the Mob not ceasing till after seven Days

slaughter. A great many other Cities of France followed
the Example of Paris, so that within few Days
near 30000 were miserably massacred. The King of
Navarre and Prince of Conde were forced to abjure
the Reformed Religion. This was the so much celebrated
Parisian Wedding, which Gabriel Naude would
fain represent us a state's Trick, but this is, in my
Opinion,The Fourth War. a very gross way of arguing. Nevertheless
the Huguenots did quickly recollect themselves, after
the first Consternation was over, renewing the War
with great Animosity and Revenge. During this
War the King's Army besieged Rochelle near eight
Months together, and having lost 12000 Men before
it, News was brought, That the Duke d' Anjou was
elected King of Poland. Hence an Opportunity was
taken to raise the siege with some Reputation, and to
make a Peace the fourth time with the Huguenots;
by vertue of which,1573. the Cities of Rochelle, Montauban
and Nismes were given them for their security. 
But immediately,The Fifth War. in the Year next following, the fifth
War commenced; at which time also a third Faction
arose in France, which was called, that of the Politicians;
they pretended, without having any regard to
the Religious Differences, to seek the publick Welfare,
to have the Queen removed from the Administration
of the Government, and the Italians and those of
Guise to be banished the Kingdom of France. The
Heads of this Faction were those of the House of Montmorency,
who intended, during these Troubles, to
play their own Game. These were afterwards very
instrumental in helping Henry IV. to the Crown. 
During these Troubles Charles IX. died, leaving no
legitimate Issue behind him. §. 21. Henry III. After the Death of Charles IX. the Crown
fell to Henry III. who was at that time in Poland, during
whose absence his Mother Catharine governed the
Kingdom, which was in a very confused Estate. He
left Poland privately, and taking his Way by Vienna
and Venice, arrived safely in France. But after he had
taken upon him the Administration of Affairs, he deceived
every body in those Hopes which were conceived

of him before. For he being addicted only to his Pleasures
and Idleness, was led away by his Favourites,
leaving the chief Administration of the Kingdom to
his Mother. The Huguenots Power encreased remarkably
after the Duke of Alenson, the Kings Brother,
sided with them, and Conde and the Paltzgrave,
John Casimir, led an Army out of Germany into
France; besides that, the King of Navarre found
means to make his escape out of Prison. The fifth
Peace was therefore concluded with the Huguenots,
whereby they obtained very advantageous Conditions. 
About the same time a new Faction was set up,The Holy League. 
which was composed of a great many small ones,
this was called The holy Ʋnion, or League, which
reduced France to the most miserable Condition that
could be. The chief promoter of it was Henry Duke
of Guise, who, perceiving, that the great Authority
which he had among the People, made him to be hated
by the King, endeavoured to make a Party of his
own. He made use especially of the Priests and common
People of Paris; among whom the Name of the
Guises was in great Veneration. He was encouraged
to undertake this Design, because the King was despised
by all, and the Women by their Intrigues, ruled
at Court. Besides this, he pretended to be descended
from the Race of Charles the Great, which was excluded
unjustly from the Crown by Hugh Capet. The
Pretence of this League was the Catholick Religion;
and there was a Draught made of this League, which
contained chiefly three things, viz. The Defence of the
Catholick Religion; the Establishment of Henry III. in
the Throne, and the maintaining the Liberty of the
Kingdom, and the Assembly of the states. Those who
entered into this League promised to be obedient to
such Head or General as should be chosen for the Defence
of this League, all which was confirmed by
Oath. At the first setting up of this League the King
connived at it, hoping thereby the sooner to subdue
the Huguenots; nay, he himself subscribed the same at
the Dyet at Blois,
         1577. declaring himself the Head of this
League. The sixth War. Then the sixth War was begun against the
Huguenots, but the King made Peace with them the

same Year, notwithstanding that they were in a very
ill Condition, neither was any thing done worth mentioning
in this War. The War being ended, the
King returning to his Pleasures, confounded great
summs of Money, and therefore laid new and heavy
Impositions upon the People, and his Favourites grew
very Insolent; which increased the Hatred against
him, and at the same time the Respect and Love of
the People to those of Guise. Besides this, the Duke
of Alenson, the King's Brother, declaring himself
Lord of the Netherlands,
         spain enters the League. 
         Philip King of spain was
provoked to revenge himself of the French, and upheld
the League. The seventh War. In the Year 1579 the seventh War
was begun against the Huguenots, wherein also they
succeeded very ill. Notwithstanding this the King
made a Peace with them in the Year next following
he being unwilling that they should be quite rooted
out, for fear that the League might prove too strong
for himself. The German Horse were also much feared,
and the Duke of Alenson was very forward to have
the Peace concluded, that he might be at leisure to
employ his Forces in the Netherlands. This Peace
lasted five Years, during which time the Hatred against
the King increased daily, because of the heavy Taxes
which were devoured by his Favourites. He made
himself also the more despised by playing too much
the Hypocrite, and by transforming himself almost into
a Monk. The French Glory was also much eclipsed,
when the Duke of Alenson behaved himself so ill in
the Netherlands, and the French Fleet which was sent
to the Assistance of Anthony the Bastard, was totally
ruined near Tercera. But the League grew very
strong after the Death of the Duke of Alenson, the
King's younger Brother, the King having no hopes
of any Issue of his Body: Then it was that the Duke
of Guise proposed to himself no less than the Crown,
tho' he for a colour set up the Cardinal of Bourbon,
thereby to exclude the King of Navarre. And because
it was suspected that the King favoured the King
of Navarre, the Priests began to thunder in the Pulpits,
and to make horrid Exclamations, that the
Catholick Religion was lost; the Duke of Guise entered

into a Confederacy with Philip, who was to furnish
great summs of Money under pretext of maintaining
the Catholick Religion, and to assist the Cardinal
of Bourbon in obtaining the Crown; but in effect,
this Intention was to uphold the Divisions in
France,
         1585. thereby to disenable it to take part with the
Netherlands. Then the Leaguers began to break out
into an open War; and having taken a great many
Towns, obliged the King, according to their Demands,
to forbid the Exercise of the Protestant Religion in
France. 
         The Eighth War. And so began the Eighth War against the
Huguenots, and if the King had been in earnest to ruin
them, they would have been in a very ill Condition:
For tho' the King of Navarre beat the Duke de Joyeuse
near Coutras,
         1587. yet did he not prosecute his Victory. 
And about the same time the Duke of Guise dispersed
the German and swiss Forces, which under the
Command of Fabian de Dona were marching to the
Assistance of the Huguenots. This Army, being destitute
of a good Commander was miserably mauled,
and the rest sent home in a very shamefull Condition. 
This Victory acquired the Duke of Guise great Applause
and Favour among the People, and still lessened
the Value of the King's Person; so that the Priests now
did not stick to exclaim against the King in their sermons,
calling him a Tyrant. The King therefore having
resolved with himself to punish the Heads of the
League in Paris,
         The League force the King from Paris. 
          they broke out into open Rebellion,
and having sent for the Duke of Guise as their Protector,
the King was obliged to leave Paris by Night:
But the King perceiving that more Cities sided daily
with the League,1588. and despairing to overcome them by
Force, took another Course to obtain his Ends, and
made an Agreement with the Duke of Guise, with
great Advantages on his and the Leaguers side: He
pretended also to have forgotten all past Injuries, on
purpose to inveigle the Duke of Guise. And under
these specious pretences he got him to appear at the
Assembly of the Estates at Blois. In the mean time the
Duke of savoy had taken from the French the Marquisate
of saluzze, the only Province left them in Italy:
But the Estates, who were most of them Creatures

of the Duke of Guise, being very urgent in their
Demands, to have the King of Navarre declared incapable
of the Crown, and the Duke of Guise to be
made Constable,The Duke and Cardina of Guise assassinated by the King's Order at Blois. 
          the King caused the Duke of Guise
and his Brother the Cardinal to be murthered. This
put those of the League into a Rage, and with the
Assistance of the Priests, the King was in Paris publickly
declared to have forfeited the Crown. Most of the
great Cities of France being stirred up by the Example
of the Parisians did the same, declaring the Duke de
Maine, Brother to the Duke of Guise, Lieutenant-General
of the state and Crown of France, and supream
Head of the League; who endeavoured, but
in vain,The King makes use of the Huguenots against the League. to surprize the King in Tours. The King
then being overpowered by the League, and besides
this, excommunicated by the Pope, was obliged to
make an Agreement with the King of Navarre and
to make use of the Huguenots. And having got together
a great Army, he marched towards Paris, with
a Resolution to reduce that City to Obedience by
Force of Arms: But the day before the general Attack
was to be made, one James Clement, a Jacobin Monk,
brought a Letter out of the City directed to the King,
which whilst he delivered, pretending to whisper the
King, thrust a Knife into his Bowels, of which Wound he
died the day following:Aug. 2. 1589. The last of the House of Valois. 
        §. 22. Henry IV. 
         Henry IV. whom we hitherto have called
the King of Navarre, and, who was the first of the
House of Bourbon, did at the beginning of his Reign,
meet with no less Difficulties than he had met with
before. For tho' he was lawfull Heir to the Crown,
yet the Protestant Religion, which he professed, was
no small obstacle, for as long as he was addicted to
that, the League, the Pope, and spain, would questionless
oppose him with all their might: But if he
changed his Religion he was in danger of losing the Assistance
of the Huguenots which had been steady to him,
and so set himself betwixt two stools. His Difficulties on the account of his Religion. And it would
have been very unbecoming, to have so publickly accommodated
his Religion to his Interest. Notwithstanding
this, immediately after the Death of Henry III. 

all the great Men of the Army assembled together,
promised him Obedience after several Contests,
under Condition, that within six Months he would
suffer himself to be instructed in the Catholick Religion. 
But because Henry would not be bound to any
certain time, but only gave them some Hopes in
general terms, it was agreed, That the Huguenots
should enjoy the free Exercise of their Religion, yet
that the Catholick Religion should be re-established
in all Cities, and the Revenues restored to the Clergy. 
But, those of the League, because the Duke of Maine
at that time durst not take upon him the Title of
King, proclaimed the Cardinal of Bourbon, an ancient
decrepid Man, Uncle to King Henry, and who was
then in Custody, their King, declaring the Duke de
Maine Lieutenant-General of the Crown. The Leaguers
made the strongest Party, having on their side
the Common People, most of the great Cities, all the
Parliaments except that of Rennes and Bourdeaux, almost
all the Clergy, spain, the Pope, and the rest of
the Catholick Princes, except Venice and Florence. 
But the Heads were not very unanimous, and the
Duke de Maine had not Authority enough to keep
them in Unity. But on the King's side were almost
all the Nobility, the whole Court of the deceased King,
all the Protestant Princes and states, the old Huguenot
Troops, who had done great service to Henry,
and would still have done more, if they had not
mistrusted him, that he would change his Religion. 
Each Party watched an Opportunity of surprizing one
another. The Duke of Maine endeavouring to surprize
the King near Diep, was bravely repulsed, which
seemed to be ominous to the League. On the other
Hand, the King could not get Paris tho' he had taken
the suburbs. But Henry was not only pestered by the
League, but also for want of Money, was obliged to
keep up his Party with fair Words and Promises. 
The spaniards also began to intermeddle publickly in
the Affairs of France, in hopes in this Juncture either
to conquer the Kingdom, or to divide it, or at least
to weaken it. But the Duke de Maine did underhand
oppose these Designs, being unwilling, that in

case he could not be King himself, France should fall
under the subjection of spain. In the Year 1590,
Henry obtained a glorious Victory over the Duke de
Maine, who had double the Number, near Ivry. 
Then he blocked up Paris, which was reduced to the
greatest Extremity by Famine, but relieved by the
Duke of Parma Governour of the Netherlands. In
the Year 1591, there arose a third Faction, the young
Cardinal of Bourbon making Pretensions to the Crown,
but was very fortunately disappointed in his Aim by
the King. The Pope Excommunicates Henry. 
          Then Pope Gregory XIV. excommunicated
Henry, exhorting all his subjects to withdraw themselves
from their Obedience, which Difficulty Henry
did not surmount without great troubles. The spaniards
also declared themselves more freely, Philip offering
his Daughter Isabella Clara Eugenia to be made
Queen of France; which Proposal was mightily encouraged
by the young Duke of Guise, he being then
just escaped out of his Custody, as 'tis supposed, by
connivance of the King, who supposed, that thereby
that Party might be divided, since he would certainly
endeavour to oppose the Designs of the Duke de
Maine his Uncle. Proposals about setting up another King. After the Duke of Parma had raised
the siege of Roan, the spaniards urged more and more,
that the French would take a Resolution concerning
the setting up of another King. And in the Assembling
of the Estates in Paris, which was held for that
purpose,1593. it was proposed, That Isabella the Daughter
of Philip, being born of a French Mother, should be
declared Queen of France, and that she should have
for her Husband Ernest Arch-Duke of Austria. But
the French refusing to accept of a Foreigner for their
King, Charles Duke of Guise was proposed as a Husband
to Isabella. This Proposition relished very ill
with the Duke of Maine, who thought himself so
well deserving, that no body ought to be preferred before
him; wherefore, if he could not have the Crown,
he was resolved no body else should have it, and so
emploied all his Cunning, that there was nothing determined
in the Assembly concerning this Proposition;
the King, however, plainly perceived, That if he did
not change his Religion, his Affairs must needs grow

worse, especially, since these Catholicks, who hitherto
had been of his Party did threaten to leave him, if
he did not perform his Promise. He called therefore
the Bishops together,The King changes his Religion. who instructed him in the Catholick
Faith, and having received Absolution, he
went,1593. to st. Denys's Chapel to Mass. And that the
People might tast the sweetness of Peace, and desire
it, he made a Truce of three Months, which proved
very successfull, especially, since the fundamental Pretence,
namely, Henry's being a Heretick, was now removed. 
Vitry and the City of Meaux were the first
that surrendered themselves to the King in the same
Year,several Cities surrender to him. upon very advantageous Conditions; Aix, Lyons,
Orleans, Bourges and other Cities soon followed
their Example. And to encourage the rest to do the
same, the King caused himself to be Crowned and Anointed
in Chartres, Rheims being as yet in the hands
of the League. Not long after Paris was also surrendred
by the Governour Brissac; and here the King was
received with such joyfull Acclamations of the People,
as if they had never been his Enemies, the spanish Garrison
being turned out with Ignominy, and the hissing
of the Common people. Then all the rest of the Cities
and Governours surrendred themselves to the King
on very advantageous Conditions, which the King was
willing to grant them, that he might once be put in
quiet possession of the Crown, and drive the spaniards
out of France. The young Duke of Guise submitted
himself, being made Governour of Provence. Then
Henry denounced War against spain, not only to revenge
himself for what Troubles they had created to
him before, but also to please the Huguenots, and to
root out of the People their affection for the spaniards. 
These were the Fruits Philip reapt for so many Millions,
which he had bestowed in supporting the League. 
In the beginning of the same Year,1594. a Knife was by a
certain desperate Ruffian,The King assaulted and wounded by a Ruffian. called John Castel, thrust
into the King's Mouth, whereby he lost one of his
Teeth. It was the King's good fortune that he just
bowed himself, this Villain's aim having been at his
Throat:The Jesuits banished, And because it was found out, that the Jesuits
had been tampering with him, whose Principles

also were thought very dangerous, they were banished
out of France, but some years after restored again. 
Afterwards the Duke of Nevers being sent to Rome
to obtain Absolution for King Henry, the same was
granted by the Pope, who had been very averse hitherto
to Henry; but perceiving that he would maintain
his Crown in spite of him, was now for ingratiating
himself with the King. Then the Dukes of Maine,
and Espernon, and Marseilles were received again into
the King's favour. But the War against spain did
not succeed according to wish. For tho' the King had
got some advantages over them in the Franche Comte,
and had beat the spaniards out of Han in Picardy; yet
on the other side, these took Dourlans and Cambray,
the latter of which had been hitherto in the Possession of
Balagny under French protection; and in the Year 1596,
next following, they took Calais and Ardres. And tho'
the King took from the spaniards Fere, yet was that
a very slender compensation of his Losses. But there
happened another great Misfortune; For the spaniards
in the Year next following took the City of Amiens by
surprize, which was not re-taken without great pains. 
In the Year 1598, the Duke of Mercoeur, who hitherto
had stood out resolutely in Bretany, did at last submit
himself, hoping thereby to obtain the said Dukedom. 
And to set the Huguenots at rest, he published
for their security that famous Edict of Nants,
         The Edict at Nants. 
          as it is
called, by virtue of which they have hitherto enjoyed
the free Exercise of Religion. At last a Peace was concluded
betwixt Henry and the spaniards at Vervins,
         The Peace of Vervins. 
         
with Conditions, that such Places as were taken since
the Year 1559, should be restored on both sides. A
Peace being thus concluded, and Henry resolved to be
even with the Duke of savoy, who under his Predecessour's
Reign had taken saluzze, and during the intestine
Wars had raised great Troubles in Dauphine and
Provence, in hopes to snatch away a piece of the dismembred
Kingdom; and tho' the Duke came in
Person into France, and promised to the King to give
him some other Places in exchange of the former; yet
was he not in earnest, in hopes to be upheld by spain,
or that the Marshal de Biron, with whom he kept private

Intelligence, should renew the civil Commotions. 
But the King fell upon him,He takes from the Duke of savoy, all that he possessed on this side the Alpes. 
          and took from the Duke
all what he was possessed of on this side of the Alpes. 
At last, by Mediation of the Pope, an agreement was
made, that the Duke should give to France, in exchange
for saluzze, La Bresse, Bugey, Valromay en Gex. 
The Italian Princes were very ill satisfied with this
Peace,1600. since there being no door left for France to enter
Italy, Italy was left to the discretion of the spaniard. 
But Henry being tired with so long and tedious
War, was resolved at last to enjoy the sweet Fruits of
Peace after so many years Troubles. But soon after a
dangerous Conspiracy was discovered,The Conspiracy of the Marshal de Biron. 
          contrived by the
Mareschal de Biron, who intended with the Assistance
of the spaniards to depose the King, and to dismember
the Kingdom, by setting up a great many petty Principalities;
having agreed with the rest, to have for his
share the Dukedom of Burgundy. And he refusing to
accept of the King's Mercy, which he was willing to
grant him in consideration of his great Deserts, was
condemned,1602. and his Head cut off. The King being
now at Peace, did employ all his Thoughts, how France
might recover it self after such tedious Wars, and that
good Ordinances might be established, but especially
that his Revenues might be encreased. He established
for this purpose all sorts of Manufactories,He introduces Manufacturies. and especially
that of silk, (which afterwards drew great Riches
into that Kingdom. ) But even in the midst of Peace
he was continually troubled with his Queen, who was
jealous about his Mistrisses; and the spaniards were always
plotting both against his Person and Crown. On
the other hand, Henry had a design to oppose the growing
Power of the House of Austria,
         His Design to put a stop to the growth of the House of Austria. 
          by keeping it within
the Bounds of spain, and the Hereditary Countries
in Germany. And 'tis said, that for that purpose he
concerted Measures with the Northern Crown, with
Holland, with the Protestant Princes of Germany, with
the Elector of Bavaria, the Duke of savoy, the swiss,
and even the Pope himself. To put this design in execution,
he took the opportunity of those Differences
which were then on foot concerning the succession in
the Country of Juliers, which, that it might not be

devoured by the House of Austria, he was resolved to
prevent with all his Might. This is certain, that his
Preparations were greater, than seemed to be requisite
only for the business of Juliers; for he and his Allies
had got 120000 Men together, and prodigious summs
of Money. The House of Austria on the other hand
did not make the least Preparations, just as if it had
fore-known the fatal Blow, which happened soon after:
The Army was marching towards the Netherlands,
and the King ready to follow in a few days, having
caused the Queen to be Crowned, and constituted
her Regent during his absence; When the King
going along the street in Paris in his Coach, which
was fain to stop by reason of the great Croud of the
People,He is Assassinated by Ravillac. 
          was by a desperate Ruffian, whose Name was
Francis Ravillac, stabbed with a Knife in his Belly,
so that he without uttering one word died immediately. May 14. 1610. 
There are some, who make no-question of it,
but that this Villain was set on to commit this fact,
and that it was not done without the knowledge of
the spaniards and the Queen her self. And so fell this
great Hero by the hands of a profligate Wretch, after
he had surmounted great Difficulties in ascending the
Throne, and had avoided above fifty several Conspiracies;
which being most contrived by the Priests against
his Life, were all timely discovered. His Death
proved very pernicious to the Kingdom, because, during
the Minority of his son, the Power of the Great
Men, and also of the Huguenots, did extreamly encrease. §. 23. His son Lewis XIII. succeeded him,Lewis XIII. being
scarce nine Years of Age, and under the Tuition of his
Mother Mary de Medicis, she endeavoured to preserve
Peace abroad by Alliance, and at home by Clemency
and Liberality towards the great Men of the Kingdom,
who nevertheless several times raised Disturbances,
whereby they made their own advantage, the Queen-Regent
being not Powerfull enough to keep them in
Obedience by force. As soon as the King had taken
upon himself the Management of Affairs,1617. he caused
Concini, Marshal d' Ancre, who was born a Florentine,
to be killed, he having been in great Power during the

Queen's Regency, and by his Pride, Riches and Power,
drawn upon himself the Hatred of the subjects; by his
Death he hoped to appease the dissatisfied Multitude. 
The Queen-Mother was sent away from Court to Blois,
from whence she was carried away by the Duke d' Espernon. 
And these Commotions were at last appeased
by bestowing liberal Presents among the Great Men. 1619. 
About the same time Richlieu,
         Richlieu comes in play. afterwards made a
Cardinal, began to be in great Esteem in Court, who
advised the King to establish his Authority, and to
take up by the Roots the intestine Evils of France. 
He laid this down as a fundamental Principle, That he
should take from the Huguenots the power of doing him
any mischief, considering that such as were dissatisfied
at any time, or that were of a turbulent spirit, took
always refuge, and were assisted by them. The first
beginning was made in the King's Patrimonial Province
of Bearn, where he caused the Catholick Religion
to be re-established. The Huguenots being greatly
dissatisfied thereat, began to break out into Violence,
whence the King took an opportunity to recover several
Places from them, but sustained a considerable Loss
in the siege of Montauban, till at last Peace was made
with the Huguenots, under condition that they should
demolish all their new Fortifications, except those of
Montauban and Rochelle. In the Year 1625, Cardinal
Richlieu was made Chief Minister of France,
         Made chief Minister of state. about
which time also the second War with the Huguenots
was ended. But this Peace did not last long, because
those of Rochelle would not bear, that the Fortress called
Fort-Lewis, should be built just under their Noses. 
Richlieu therefore having taken a resolution at once
to put an end to this War by the taking of Rochell, besieged
it so close both by sea and Land, that the English,
who had had very ill success in the Isle of Rhée,
where they Landed, could bring no succours into the
place. Rochelle taken. 
          Their Obstinacy was at last over-come by Famine,
of 18000 Citizens, there having been not above
5000 left, for they had lived without Bread for thirteen
Weeks. With this stroke the strength of the
Huguenots was broken, Montauban upon the persuasion
of the Cardinal having demolished its Works. 

The cunning Duke of Roan also at last made his peace,
after he had been sufficiently troublesome to the King
in Languedoc, under condition, that the Cities of
Nismes and Montpelier should demolish their Fortifications;
but for the rest, enjoy the free Exercise of
their Religion. And thus the Ulcer, which had settled
it self in the very Entrails of France, was happily healed
up. The Effects of the Civil Wars. It is related by some, that these Civil Wars
have devoured above a Million of People; that 150
Millions were employed in paying of the souldiers;
that nine Cities, 400 Villages, 20000 Churches, 2000
Monasteries,A War in Italy. 
          and 100000 Houses were burnt or laid level
with the ground. Then France applied all their
care towards Foreign Affairs. 1628. The King assisted the
Duke of Nevers, in obtaining the Dukedom of Mantua,
which belonged to him by Right of succession,
but whom the spaniards endeavoured to exclude from
the same, as being a French-man. In this War the
siege of Casal is most famous, in the defence of which
place, the French gave incredible proofs of their Bravery. 
At last the business was,The first Occasion of Mazarini's Greatness. through the wise Management
of the Popish Nuncio Mazarini (who then
laid the first Foundation of his future Greatness in
France) composed, and the Duke of Nevers afterwards
by the Treaty made at Chierasco, established
in the Dukedoms of Mantua and Montferrat. The
King also bought Pignerol of the Duke of savoy,
         How Pignerol came into the hands of the French. 
          that
so the French might not want a door into Italy. France
had also before taken part with the Grisons against
the Inhabitants of the Valteline, who had revolted
being assisted by the spaniards, whereby he prevented
this Country from falling into the Hands of the
spaniards, and so Matters were restored to their former
state. In the Year 1631, France made an Alliance
with sweden, allowing to that King a yearly
Pension, to assist him in opposing the Greatness of the
House of Austria. But when King Gustavus Adolphus
began to be formidable on the Rhine, he took the
Elector of Treves into his protection, putting a Garrison
into Hermanstein, (which nevertheless in the Year
1636,The Queen Mother raises Troubles. was forced to a surrender by Famine. ) In the
mean time the Queen-Mother and the Kings Brother

the Duke of Orleans envying the Greatness of Richelieu
had raised some tumults. With them also sided
Montmorency, who paid for it with his Head, and put
an inglorious end to his noble Family, which boasted
to have been the first noble Family that embraced the
Christian Religion in France. And tho' this business was
afterwards Composed, the Queen Mother being received
into Favour again, yet was she so dissatisfied, because
she could not Act according to her own Will; that she
retired into Flanders, and from thence into England,
where she made some stay,1642. and at last died in a very
low Condition in Cologne. 
         The King takes Lorrain from that Duke. In the Year 1633. the King
took from the Duke of Lorrain his Countrey, because
he had declared himself for the Emperour. And
when afterwards,1634. 
         viz. after the Battel fought near
Nordlingen the swedish Affairs were in a very low
Condition, and the House of Austria began to hold
up its Head again, France broke out into open War
with spain, to balance the growing Power of the
House of Austria. He took for a pretence that the
spaniards had surprized the City of Treves, and taken
the Elector of Treves Prisoner, who was under French
protection. And then the War began in Italy, Germany,
the Netherlands and Roussilion, which was carried
on with various Fortune; yet so, that the French
got the better of it at last. To touch upon some of
the most remarkable Actions: The first Attack which
the French made in the Netherlands did not succeed
very well, they having been forced to raise the siege
of Lovain with great Loss. 1636. In the Year 1636, Piccolomini
marched into Picardy, and Galias into Burgundy,
but did nothing of moment. On the other hand the
French beat up the siege of Leucate in Roussilion,
         1638. and
the brave Duke Barnhard of saxen-Weimar took the
Fortress of Brisac, he carrying on the War with
French Money. And after the Death of this Duke,
which happened not long after, the King of France
brought both that Fortress and his Army over to its
side with Money. Yet the French miscarried in the
same Year before st. Omer and Fontarabia, before the
last of which Places the Prince of Conde sustained a considerable
Loss. In the same Year, viz. on the 5th. of

         september, Lewis XIV. was, almost by a Miracle, born
of a Marriage, which had proved unfruitfull for twenty
Years before. In the Year 1639, the French were
beaten before Thionville. In the Year 1640, they took
Arras, and in the same Year Catalonia, revolting from
spain, threw it self under the French Protection. In
the Year 1641, a great Misfortune hung over Richlieu's
Head, the Count the soissons having raised a dangerous
Rebellion; but, he being killed in an Engagement,
wherein otherwise his Party had the better, established,
by his Death, the Cardinal's Authority, and
the Quiet of France. In the Year 1642, Perpignan
was taken, at which siege the King and Richlieu were
both present. Monsieur Cinqmats did about that time
first insinuate himself into the King's favour, hoping
thereby to undermine Richlieu. And the better to
balance the Cardinal, he had made some under-hand
Intrigues with spain. But the Cardinal having discovered
the business, caused his Head to be cut off; as
also de Thou the younger's, because he had been privy
to the business; tho' he had advised against it, yet had
he not discovered it. From the Duke of Bouillon, who
had been also of the Cabal, he took for a Punishment
his strong Hold, sedan. In the same Year Richlieu died,
to his great good fortune, the King being grown quite
weary of him, notwithstanding he had laid the first
Foundation of the Greatness of France,
         May 14. 1643. which is now
so formidable to Europe. The King also died not long
after. §. 24. Lewis XIV. Lewis XIV. was but Five years of Age when
he came to the Crown, his Mother 'tis true bore the
name of Regent of France, but in effect the Cardinal
Julius Mazarini had the chief Management of the
Kingdom;Mazarini's Ministry. 
          which was then in a very flourishing Condition;
but every Body was for enriching himself out
of the Kings Purse during his Minority; and Mazarini
was very liberal, thereby endeavouring to make them
in love with his Government. But the Treasury being
become empty, new Taxes were of necessity to
be imposed upon the People which caused a great
dissatisfaction against the Government. Nevertheless

for the first Five years every thing was pretty quiet
at home, and War carried on abroad. At the very
first beginning of this new Government the Duke
d' Austria obtained a signal Victory against the spaniards
near Rocroy; after which he took Thionville,
and Gaston the Kings Uncle Graveling;
         1644. 
         Anguin
revenged the loss which the French had sustainded the
Year before near Dutlingen, and, having first beaten
the Bavarian Forces near Friburg in Brisgaw, he
took Philipsburg; in the Year 1646. he beat the Bavarian
Troops near Norlingen, and afterwards took Dunkirk. 
But in the Year next following he in vain besieged
the City of Lorida. 
         Peace of Munster. 
          In the Year 1648. a Peace
was concluded at Munster in Westphalia, betwixt the
Emperour and France, by Vertue of which the latter
got the two Fortresses of Brisac and Philipsburg,
the Countrey of Puntgau, and part of the upper Alsatia. 
But as France by this Peace was freed from
one Enemy,The intestine Commotions. so on the other hand the intestine Commotions
put a stop to its great Progresses. The chief
reason of these Troubles was, that some envying Mazarini,
as being a Foreigner, they would by all means
have him removed from the Helm, and this they sought
with the greater Importunity, because they were not
in awe of the King, who was but a Child, neither of
his Mother, she being an outlandish Woman. some
of the great Men also were for fishing in troubled Waters:
But above all the rest, the Prince of Conde
would fain have been Master, and have made the Cardinal
dance after his Pipe. The Cardinal was for
bringing of him over to his Party by a Marriage proposed
to him; but the Prince of Conde perceiving that
the Cardinal was for maintaining his old Post, nor
would depend on him, rejected the Offer as unbecoming
the Grandeur of his House. There were also
some Women of a restless spirit concerned in these Intrigues,
among whom was Mad. de Longueville, sister
of the Prince of Conde, Mad. Chevreuse, Mombazon,
and others. The first beginning was by slanderous
Papers and Libels which were daily dispersed in Paris. 
         1648. 
There was also a certain Faction set up,The slingers. who called
themselves the slingers, because they openly undertook

to knock down the Cardinal, as David struck
down the Giant Goliah by the help of his sling. 
The Heads of this Faction were the Duke of Beaufort,
and Guadi the Archbishop of Paris, afterwards called
the Cardinal de Rez. With this Party also sided the
Parliament of Paris, which did pretend to have a
great Authority against the Government at that time. 
The first Insurrection was made in Paris, occasioned
by the taking into Custody of one Braussel a Member
of the Parliament, whereupon the King left the City. 
Yet the Business was composed for that time, some
things having been granted to the mutinous Party. 
But the Faction of the slingers renewing their former
Disturbances,The King forced to leave Paris, 1649. the King left the City a second time. 
The Parliament having then publickly condemned the
Cardinal, grew every day stronger, Turenne, who then
commanded the French Army in Germany, having declared
for that side; but he was fain to leave the Army,
which was kept in Duty by the help of a good summ
of Money. And tho' Matters were afterwards reconciled
a second time at st. Germains, yet the Design against
Mazarin was not laid aside; the Prince of
Conde, who had brought over the slingers to his Party,
not ceasing to stir them up against him. But because
they had a different Aim, for the slingers were for totally
pulling down of the Cardinal, but the Prince of
Conde would only have humbled him, the Cardinal
cunningly raised a misunderstanding betwixt them,
by setting the Prince of Conde against the slingers. 
Whereupon the slingers were reconciled with the
Cardinal. The Cardinal taking hold of this Opportunity,
caused the Prince of Conde and his Brother the
Prince of Conti, and their Brother-in-law the Duke
of Longueville to be taken into Custody. The Imprisonment of the Princes. This was
putting Fuel into the Fire, every body being dissatisfied
at the Imprisonment of the Princes. The City
of Bourdeaux openly rebelled. The spaniards upon
this Occasion took from the French, Piombino and Porto
Longone in Italy. The Archduke Leopold struck
Terrour into the City of Paris it self, on the side of
the Netherlands. And tho' the Cardinal beat Turenne
near Rethel, he being gone over to the spaniards, yet

the Hatred against him encreased daily, and the Faction
of the slingers, the Parliament, and the Duke of
Orleans were absolutely for having the Princes set at
Liberty. The Cardinal therefore perceiving that nothing
was to be done by open Violence, resolved to avoid
the storm, by setting the Princes at Liberty:
And he himself retired to Bruel, the Court of the
then Elector of Collen. 
         1651. Then he was by a Decree of
the Parliament for ever banished the Kingdom of
France. 
         The Cardinal banished France. 
          
         Mazarini being thus removed, the Prince of
Conde began to disturb the publick Quiet with more
freedom, having engaged himself with the spaniards,
and being gone to Bourdeaux, he began to make open
War against the Government. And the spaniards
taking hold of this Opportunity, recovered Barcellona,
and with it all Catalonia. 
         The Queen recalls him. Then the Queen recalled
the Cardinal, who having strengthened the King's
Army by such Troops as he had got together, fought
several times very briskly with the Prince of Conde. 
But seeing that the Hatred which the Faction of the
slingers and the Parliament had conceived against
him, did not diminish, he took this Course, that he
publickly declared, he was willing to leave the Kingdom,
to re-establish the publick Quiet. He hoped
by so doing, to lay the Blame of the Intestine Divisions
upon the Prince of Conde alone; which Design
proved successfull; for thereby the Eyes of the People
were opened, who now plainly perceived, that the
Cardinal sought the Good of the King and Kingdom,
but the Prince of Conde his own Interest, Dunkirk
and Graveling being lost in the Fray. The Prince of
Conde therefore perceiving that he had lost the Favour
of the People, retired with his Troops into the spanish
Netherlands. Then the Cardinal returned to Court,
and ever after had the Administration of the chiefest
Affairs of the Kingdom till his Death, without any
further Opposition. The City of Paris returned to
its due Obedience, the Faction of the slingers was
dissolved, the Duke of Orleans left the Court; Rez
was taken into Custody, and Bourdeaux forced to submit. 
In the Year next following the French began again
to make War on the spaniards;
         1653. they took Mommedy
         
with great difficulty, and fortunately relieved
Arras: But they were beaten from before Valenciennes
and Cambray. France having just made an Alliance
with Cromwell,
         1658. the joint Forces of France and England
besieged Dunkirk under the Command of Turenne:
And the Duke John d' Austria and Prince de
Conde,
who came with an Army to relieve it, being
repulsed with great loss, the City was taken and delivered
to the English, from whom the King afterwards
redeemed it for four Millions. 1662. About the same time
Graveling was also retaken. The Pyrenaean Peace, 1659. At last a Peace was concluded
between France and spain near the Pyrenaean
Mountains by the two chief Ministers of state, on
both sides, viz. by Mazarini and Don Lewis de Haro,
by vertue of which, France was to keep Roussilion
and the greatest part of the places which were taken
in the Netherlands; Mary Theresa, the Daughter of
Philip IV. was to be married to the King, and the
Prince of Conde to be received into Favour again. This
last point met with great Opposition for a considerable
time. The Death of Mazarini. 
          In the Year next following died Mazarini,
who, as 'tis said, left the King among others,
this Lesson, That he should govern himself, and not
trust entirely to any Favourite. The first thing of moment,
which the King undertook, was, to settle his
Revenues in a good order. 1661. He began with the Lord
High Treasurer Fouquet, whom he took into Custody,
and made a strict Inquisition against all such as
having had hitherto the management of his Revenues,
had enriched themselves therewith: The sponges
which were swelled up with Riches, being soundly
squeezed out, brought an incredible Treasure into the
King's Coffers. A Dispute about Precedency between the French and spanish Embassadours. In the Year 1661 a Difference arose
betwixt the French and spanish Embassadours in London,
about the Precedency at the solemn Entry made
by Count Nile Brake the swedish Embassadour, where
the French Embassadour's Coach was put back by
Violence. This might easily have proved the Occasion
of a War, if the spaniards had not given satisfaction
to the French, and agreed, That where-ever there
were any French Embassadours resident, the spanish
should not appear upon any publick Occasions: Which

the French do interpret, as if spain had thereby declared,
That the spanish Ministers were always to give
place to the French of the same Character. In the
Year 1662,A Treaty with the Duke of Lorrain. 
          the King made an Agreement with the
Duke of Lorrain, according to which, he was to exchange
his Dukedom for an Equivalent in France,
and his Family to be the next in right of succession,
if the Family of Bourbon should happen to fail:
Which Agreement the Duke would fain have annulled
afterwards, but the King, who did not understand
jesting in such a point, forced him to surrender to him
Marsal. 
         A Differance with the Pope. In the same Year the Duke de Crequi the
French Embassadour at Rome, was grossly affronted
there by the Corsi Guards, which the King resented
so ill, that he took from the Pope the City of Avignon:
But the Difference was composed by the Mediation
of the Grand Duke of Tuscany at Pisa, and the Pope
was fain to send a splendid Embassy to give satisfaction
to the King. About the same time the French
would have got footing at Gigeri on the Coast of
Barbary, but were repulsed with considerable loss by
the Moors. 
         1664. The King also sent some Troops to the
Assistance of the Emperour against the Turks, who behaved
themselves bravely in the Battel fought near
st. Gothard, and contributed much to the Victory. 
Notwithstanding which the Emperour clapt up a
Peace with the Turks, fearing lest the King of France
might make use of this Opportunity to fall into the
Netherlands. Yet those Forces, which were sent to
the Assistance of the Venetians into Candie, did not
acquire so much Glory, they being too forward and
hot in the first Onset, where they lost the Duke of
Beaufort. In the Year 1665, the King of France
kindled a War betwixt the English and Dutch, thereby
to weaken their Naval Force, which was so formidable
to him, and in the mean while to get leisure to
conquer the Netherlands. 
         He attacks Flanders. 
          In the Year 1667, he entered
the Netherlands in person, and took Charleroy,
Lisle, Tournay, Doway, Courtray, Oudenarde, and
some other places, pretending, that the Netherlands
did belong to him in right of his Queen, by vertue of
the jus devolutionis or right of devolution, in Brabant,
         
notwithstanding that in the Marriage Contract
she had renounced all her Title to it. He also conquered
the County of Burgundy, but after having demolished
the Fortifications he restored it again, but
kept those places which he had taken in the Netherlands,
by vertue of the Peace concluded at Aix la Chapelle. 
The tripple Alliance,Peace made at Aix la Chapelle, 1668. as it is called, made betwixt
sweden, England and Holland, which was intended
for the Preservation of the Netherlands, did greatly
hasten this Peace; tho' France afterwards found out a
way to draw the English Court from this Alliance,
and to join with him in humbling the Hollanders,
who he said were too proud. For tho' France all along
had been in the Interest of Holland, yet the King
took it very ill, that the Dutch had made a Peace at
Munster without including France, and that they had
been so bold as to undertake the Preservation of the
Netherlands;
         1667. and when afterwards the King put
strong Garrisons into the conquered places, they sent
a Fleet on these Coasts, as it were to brave him. The
tripple Alliance also was displeasing to him, and some
are of Opinion, that the King of England, who had
not forgot the Business at Chatam, and that the Peace
concluded at Breda was not according to his wish,
had engaged himself in this Alliance, only to draw in
the Dutch thereby, and so to exasperate the King of
France against them. He invades Flanders, 1672. At last, France in conjunction
with England, made War on Holland, with prodigious
success at first; for he took three Provinces, viz. 
Gueldres, Over-yssel and Ʋtrecht; besides that he had
already possessed himself of some Passes leading into
Holland: But his Confederate the Bishop of Munster
had not the same success in the siege of Groningen,
and afterwards lost Coeverden again. And the Dutch
had better success at sea, where they behaved themselves
bravely in four several Engagements, whereas
the French Fleet, as the English say, did not engage
heartily: Besides, England grew Jealous of the great
success of the French, which was one reason, why the
Parliament did in a manner oblige the King, to make
a separate Peace with Holland, fearing, that France,
after England and Holland had destroied one another

at sea, might also, at last, fall upon them. The Emperour
and Elector of Brandenburgh endeavoured, immediately
at the beginning of the War, to give a
Diversion to France but to no great purpose, since
they did nothing but ruin several Provinces in Germany,
and drew Turenne with his Army thither, who
ravaged the Country, but especially Westphalia. The
Elector of Brandenburgh made a Peace with France
at Vossem,
         1673. whereby he got the Restitution of his
strong Holds in the Dutchy of Cleves, but as soon as
he got them into his possession,Mastricht taken by the French. 
          he made no great account
of the Peace. In the Year next following,
France took the strong City of Mastricht, where the
French both shewed their Bravery and Dexterity in
attacking of places. On the other hand, the Imperialists
had good success against Turenne, who pretended
to oppose their March; for they tricked him, and
having marched to the lower Rhine, in conjunction with
the spaniard and Prince of Orange, took Bon: This,
and the loss of Narden, which the Dutch took, caused
the French to leave Ʋtrecht and all the other places
in the United Provinces, except Grave and Mastricht:
For it seemed very difficult to maintain so many
Garrisons, and at the same time to have a sufficient
Army in the Field to oppose the Enemy; since it
might easily have happened, that all Correspondency
with these places in the United Provinces might have
been cut off by the Enemy. Afterwards spain and
the whole German Empire declared against France,
and a great many were of Opinion, That the joint
Power of spain, Holland and Germany, would be
sufficient to curb the French, and to carry the seat of
the War into France it self; but this could not be effected. 
'Tis true, the Germans did take from the
French, Philipsburgh, and beat them out of Treves,
where Mareschal de Crequi received a Defeat. But on
the other hand, the Germans were several times also,
especially near sintsheim and in Alsace, worsted by the
French, and obliged to repass the Rhine. And in the
Year 1675, there was a great probability that it would
not have gone very well with them on this side of the
Rhine,
         The Death of Turenne. 
          if the brave Turenne had not been killed by an

accidental shot, which obliged the French, who were
ignorant of his Design, after a sharp Engagement, to
retire on the other side of the Rhine. For the rest,
spain lost most by this War: for the Franche Compte
was taken from them,The Losses of the spaniards in this War. 
         Messina received voluntarily
a French Garrison, and the Dutch Fleet which was
sent to the Assistance of the spaniards into sicily, got
nothing but Blows, the brave Admiral de Ruyter being
there slain; tho' afterwards the French quitted
Messina on their own accord. Besides this the French
took from them these strong holds; Limburgh, Conde,
Valenciennes, Cambray, Yper, st. Omer, Aire and
several others. The Prince of Orange retook Graves,
but in the Battel of seneffe and st. Omer, he was worsted,
and sustained a considerable loss before Mastricht,
At last France ended this War very gloriously for it
self,Peace at Nimmegen. 
          restoring to Holland what it had taken from those
Provinces, but kept Burgundy and a great many strong
places in the spanish Netherlands. In Germany in
lieu of Philipsburgh it got Friburgh, and for the rest
the Westphalian and Copenhagen Treaties were renewed,
by Virtue of which sweden was restored to its
own again. §. 25. To consider the French Nation,The French Nation. whose History
we have briefly related, it must be observed, That
it is swarming (if I may so speak) with People, and
sowed thick with Cities and Towns. Under the Reign
of Charles IX. it is related, That above twenty Millions
of People paid the Poll Tax. some say, That
Richlieu affirmed, that by Computation, France could
bring into the Field 600000 Foot, and 150000 Horse,
provided every Man that was able to bear Arms, did
go into the Field. This Nation also has been always
warlike: nevertheless in former times, it has been objected
to them, That they were very brave at the first
Onset, but after their first Fury was a little cooled, their
Courage used to slacken, if they met with a stout and
brave Resistance: wherefore they used to make great
Conquests, but seldom kept them very long. And
after they had good success, they used to grow careless,
insult over the conquered, and put them to great

Hardships under their Government. But in our last
Wars they have shewn sufficiently, that they as little
want Constancy at last, as Heat and Fury at first. 
There is a great number of Nobles in France,
         Full of Nobility. who
make Profession of the sword, and make no difficulty
to expose themselves to any Hazards to gain Glory. 
In former times, the French Infantry was good for nothing,
wherefore they always used to employ swiss
and scotch: but now a-days, their Foot are very good,
and in attacking of a place, they are to be preferred before
all other Nations. This Nation always hath a great
Veneration and Love for their King; and as long as he
is able to maintain his Authority, is ready to sacrifice
Life and Estate for his Glory. The French are also
brisk, forward, and of a merry Constitution: as to
their outward appearance in their Apparel and Behaviour,
they are generally very comely;Their Natural Qualities. and some other
Nations, whose temper is more inclined to gravity, and
do attempt to imitate them, appear often very ridiculous,
there being a vast difference in these matters, betwixt
what is natural and what is affected. They are
of a Genius fit to undertake any thing, whether it be
in Learning, Trade, or Manufactures; especially in
those things which depend more on ingenuity and dexterity
than hard labour. On the other side, the levity
and inconstancy of the French is generally blamed,
which is easily to be perceived by such of them as are
raw and unpolished; and a great many of them glory
in amorous Intrigues, oftentimes more than is true;
and under Pretence of Freedom, they commit great
Debaucheries. §. 26. The Country which is possessed by this potent
Nation,The Nature of the Country. is very conveniently situated, almost in
the very midst of the Christian World; wherefore this
King may conveniently keep Correspondence with
them all, and prevent Europe from falling into the
hands of any one Prince. On the one side, it has the
Mediterranean, on the other the Ocean, and on both
sides a great many pretty good Harbours; and is well
watered with Rivers; besides that great Channel with
twelve sluces, by which the present King has joyned

the Rivers of Garonne and the Aude, and consequently
the Mediterranean with the Ocean; which proves very
beneficial for Trade. It is also very near of a circular
Figure, and well compacted, so that one Province may
easily assist another. Its situation. On the side of spain, the Pyrenaean
Mountains; and on the Italian side, the Alpes
are like a Bullwark to the Kingdom: but on the side
towards Germany and the Netherlands, it lies somewhat
open: For out of the Netherlands, Paris it self has
often been hard put to it. And this is the reason why
the French have been so eager in getting a good part
of these into their Possession, in which they have been
successfull in the last War, and thereby have mightily
strengthened their Frontiers: and for the same reason,
they have made themselves Masters of Lorrain, to fortify
themselves on the side of Germany; and by degrees
to become Masters of the Rhine, the ancient
boundary of Gaul, which seems the only thing wanting
to the Perfection of France. Next to this, France
may be one of the most happy and most fruitfull
Countries,Its Fertility. not only for the equal Temperature of its
Climate betwixt an immoderate Heat and an excessive
Cold; but also, because it produces every thing, which
seems to be requisite for the sustenance and Conveniency
of Mankind; so that scarce a spot of Ground is
to be found in France, but what produces something
or other for the benefit of Man. And its Product is
not only sufficient for its Inhabitants, but also plentifull
enough to be exported into foreign parts. The
Commodities exported out of France, are chiefly;
Wine, Brandy, Vinegar, salt, innumerable sorts of
silk, and Woollen stuffs, and Manufactures, Hemp,
Canvas, Linen, Paper, Glass, saffran, Almonds, Olives,
Capers, Prunello's, Chesnuts, soap, and the like. 
Yet in Normandy and Picardy, grow no Vines, but
the common people drink Cyder. scarce any Metals
are to be found in France, and not Gold or silver
Mines. But this want is supplied by the ingenuity of
the French, and the folly of Foreigners. For the
French Commodities have drawn Fleets of their Money
into France, especially since Henry IV. set up the silk
Manufactury there. There are some who have computed

that France sells stuffs A-la-mode yearly to Foreigners
only, to the value of 40 millions of Livres,
Wine 15 millions, Brandy 5 millions, salt 10, and so
proportionably of other Commodities. Mr. Forcy an
Englishman, says, that about the year 1669, the Commodities
which were brought from France into England
exceeded what were carried from England to France,
in value 1600000 lib. sterl. And it is notorious that by
help of such Commodities as they send into spain, they
get a great part of their West-India Plate-Fleet. Yet
Navigation does not flourish so much in France as it
might. The reason seems to be, that the French Nation
is not so much addicted to the sea, and that other
Nations have been before-hand with them in the
East and West-Indies. Which is the reason, that the
King, tho' he has above 100 Capital ships, yet cannot
set out so great a Fleet hitherto, as the English and
Dutch, as some think, wanting able seamen. For it
is not sufficient to Man out a Fleet once, but in time
of War, Recruits must also be had. Nevertheless it
may be this King will first settle his Maritime Affairs,
and afterwards take his opportunity to surprize his
Neighbours. Its Plantations. 
         France has very few Plantations abroad,
except what is in the Caribby Islands, the Isles called
Tartuges, and on the North-side of Hispaniola. They
apply themselves also to fishing upon the great sand
Bank before Newfoundland, and catch in Canada and
New France good store of Bevers. They have set several
Projects on foot for the East-India Trade, but
without any great success hitherto, the Dutch, who
are so powerfull there, opposing them with all their
might. Lastly the great strength of France may be
judged of by this, that the Revenue of the Clergy,
which is possessed of two fifth parts, as 'tis said, of the
Kingdom, amounts to 104 millions and 500000
Crowns yearly. The King's Revenues are computed
to amount now to 150 millions of Livres, whereas in
the last Age it did not amount to above 9 or 10 millions. 
At the time of Henry IV. to 16 millions, and in
the year 1639 to 77 millions; which vast difference is
in part to be ascribed to the different value of Money
since those times, and the great Taxes which are imposed

upon the subjects: but without question the
chief reason is, that France since that time has found
out new ways to draw Money out of other Countries. §. 27. As to the Form of Government of France,
         The Government of France. 
         
it is to be observed, That anciently there were very potent
Dukes, Earls and Lords in France, who, tho' they
were Vassals of the King, yet they used to pay no further
Obedience to him, than was consistent with their
own Interest, except the Kings were in a Condition to
oblige them to it: But all these in process of Time
were extinguished, and their Countries united to the
Crown. Now-a-days the Dukes and Earls in France
are nothing else but bare Titles annexed to some considerable
Estate without any sovereignty or Jurisdiction. 
And whereas formerly certain Countries used to
be assigned to the King's sons, whereof they bore the
Title, now-a-days only a certain yearly Revenue is
allotted them, with the Title of a certain Dukedom
or County, wherein perhaps they have not a Foot of
Ground. And after the ancient sovereign Dukedoms
and Earldoms were abolished, some of the great Men
of the Kingdom had taken upon themselves great Authority
in the Kingdom, but by the Policy of Richlieu
and Mararini they were reduced to such a Condition,
that they dare not utter a Word against the King. The
Assembly of the Estates (there being three of them,
viz. The Clergy, Nobility, and the Citizens, they
making up the third Estate) were also formerly in
great Veneration, whereby the King's Power was
much limited. But they having not been convened
since the Year 1614, their Authority is quite suppressed. 
Those of the Reformed Religion did prove also very
troublesome to the Kings of France as long as they
were in a Condition to take up Arms, but with the
loss of Rochelle they lost the Power of giving their
Kings any Disturbance for the future. And tho' the
King hitherto does not force their Consciences, yet he
draws off a great many from that Party, by hopes of
his Royal Favour and Preferments. Heretofore the
Parliament of Paris used to oppose the King's Designs,

under pretence, that it had a right, that the King
could not do any thing of great moment without its
consent; but this King hath taught it only to intermeddle
with Judicial Business, and some other Concerns,
which the King now and then is pleased to leave
to its Decision. The Gallick Church also boasts of a
particular Prerogative in regard of the Court of Rome,
she always having disputed with the Pope some part
of his Authority over her; and the King has the Nomination
of the Bishops and Abbots, all which contributes
much to the strength and Increase of this
Kingdom, if a wise and good King sits upon the
Throne. §. 28. The strength of France with reguard to England. 
          When we duely weigh the Power of France
in comparison with its Neighbours, it is easily perceived,
that there is not any state in Christendom
which France doth not equal if not exceed in Power:
'Tis true, in former Ages the English reduced the French,
but at that time they were possessed of a great part of
it themselves; there were then several Demi-sovereign
Princes; the French Infantry was then inconsiderable,
and the English Bows were terrible to them:
All which is quite otherwise now, and the English Landforces
are now not to be compared with the French
neither in Number nor Goodness, since the English are
unexercised, and their Civil Wars have rather been
carried on by Armies raised on a sudden, than well disciplined
Troops, and these Wars have not a little
weakened this Nation. On the other hand, the English
have chiefly applied themselves to sea Affairs, and
in this the French cannot hitherto be compared with
the English; yet England can scarce reap any great
Advantages from France at sea. For, suppose they
should beat the French Fleet, yet they would scarce
venture to make a Descent upon France, as having
not any footing there; and the French Privateers
would certainly do great mischief to them. But if
the English should once miscarry at sea, an that the
French should once get footing in England, it might
perhaps prove fatal to that Kingdom, since the fate
of the War must be then decided by the Issue of one

Battel, England having no Inland strong Holds. In
the last Age spain proved very troublesome to France,
         To spain. 
the French scarce being able to defend themselves against
it, and having several times been obliged to
make Peace upon disadvantageous Conditions: But
besides, that at that time the French Infantry was
good for little, and the spanish Nation was then at its
heighth, whereas now the spanish Nobility is more for
Debauchery, Gaming, and such like Intrigues, than for
acquiring Glory in War; they were then in full possession
of all the Netherlands, and Charles V. had a great
Advantage by being Emperour. But now-a-days the
Netherlands are miserably torn to pieces, they being
scarce able to Garrison the places that remain. Naples
and Milan are almost in the same condition; and
France may easily secure the Coast of Provence against
the spaniards, who may be well satisfied if the French
don't by the way of Roussilion, Navarre, or Bayonne
enter spain. 
         To Italy. 
         Italy is neither willing nor powerfull enough
to hurt France, but these Princes are well satisfied
if France does not pass the Alpes and disturb
their Repose. To Holland. The French are not powerfull enough
for the Dutch at sea, if they have an Opportunity to
make use of all their Naval strength, yet the French
Privateers may do them considerable Mischief, wherefore
I cannot see what benefit Holland can reap from
a War with France without an absolute necessity:
For the Dutch Land-forces gathered out of all Nations,
are not likely to do any great Feats against it. 
The swiss also neither can nor will hurt France,
         To the swiss. 
          they
being well satisfied if they can get Money: Wherefore
the French need not fear any thing from them, except
they should make them desperate, when in Confederacy
with others they might prove very troublesome. 
Germany seems to be the only Country,To Germany. which alone
might be able to balance France; for, if these Princes
were well united, they are able to bring more numerous
Armies into the Field, and that in no ways inferiour
in Goodness to the French; and perhaps they
might be able to hold it out with France. But considering
the present state of Germany, it seems next to
an impossibility, that all the Members of the Empire

should unanimously and resolutely engage themselves
in a long War, and prosecute the same with Vigour:
For it is not to be imagined, that all of them should
have an equal Interest in the War, and some of them
must expect to be ruined, tho' the War in the main
should prove successfull; but if it should succeed otherwise,
they must be great losers by it without reprieve. §. 29. But if it should be supposed,The strength of France in regard of a Confederacy. that France
may be attacked by a great many at once; it is to be
considered, that it is absolutely against the Interest of
some states, to join themselves against France. For,
as Affairs now stand, Portugal is not likely to join
with spain, sweden with Denmark, Poland with the
House of Austria, against France. Neither is it probable
that the Italian Princes will be desirous to assist
the Emperour and spain in subduing of France, except
we must suppose them to be willing to promote
their own Ruin. Neither is it likely that England
and Holland will agree in a War against France, for
whilst one of them is engaged in a War against France,
it seems to be the Interest of the other to stand Neuter,
and to promote its own Trade and Navigation. It is
also not very probable, that the Princes of Germany,
especially those of the Protestant Religion, should be
willing to see France fall before the House of Austria;
since both their Power and Religion would stand upon
slippery Ground, if not supported by a Foreign
Power. Wherefore it seems to be no difficult task to
persuade some of the Protestant Princes, at least, to
sit still. The swiss also are not likely to co-operate
with spain and the House of Austria in the Conquest
of France, and therefore it would not be so difficult
for France to defend it self against the House of Austria
and all its Confederates. Not to mention here,
that in such a case, sweden and Poland would not leave
France, if they were in a Condition to assist it. But
it is not probable, that France should make any account
upon an Alliance with the Turks, except in the
greatest Extremity; for the Mahometan Princes have
learned by Experience, that where-ever they have intermedled

with the Christians in their Wars, these
commonly have clapt up a Peace, without including
them, or having any regard to their Interest. On the
other hand, France seems not to be strong enough to
overturn all the states of Europe by his Conquests:
For France may be the most potent Kingdom in
Christendom, but not the only one; and by extending
its Conquests too far it would be weakened within:
In the mean time, those lesser states bordering upon
France are in great danger to be devoured by so
flourishing a Kingdom. CHAP VI. Of the United Provinces. §. 1. The ancient state of the United Provinces. 
          THat Country which is commonly called the Netherlands
or the Lower Germany, was anciently
comprehended, partly under Gaul, partly under
Germany, according as they were situated either on
this or the other side of the Rhine, which was the ancient
Boundary of these two vast Countries. That
part which was situated on this side of the Rhine, was
by Julius Caesar, together with the rest of Gaul, reduced
under the Obedience of the Roman Empire. 
Afterwards the Batavi and the Zealanders did also
submit to the Romans, yet so, that they were rather
esteemed Allies than subjects. And when in the
Fifth Century, after the Birth of Christ, the Francks
established a new Kingdom in France, these Provinces
were also at first united to it: But at the same time
when Germany was separated from France, most of
them fell to Germany, few remaining with France. The
Governours of these Provinces did, in process of time,
under the Names of Dukes and Earls, make themselves
Demi-sovereigns, as did also other Princes of
Germany and France; yet so, that it was a general
Maxim among them, To rule the People with Mildness. 
And for the security of their Liberty, they used

to grant them great Privileges, in the maintaining of
which this Nation was always very forward. The Estates
also, which consisted of the Clergy, Nobility,
and Cities, were always in great Authority, and would
not easily suffer that any new Impositions should be
laid upon the People without their consent. The Division of the 17 Provinces. 
          These
Provinces, according to the common computation,
are seventeen in number: viz. Four Dukedoms of
Brabant, Limburgh, Luxemburgh, and Gueldres: seven
Earldoms of Flanders, Artois, Hainault, Holland,
Zealand, Namur and Zutphen: Five Lordships of
Friesland, Malines, Ʋtrecht, Over-yssel and Groningen. 
Antwerp has the title of a Marquisate of the Roman Empire. 
These Provinces were anciently ruled each by
its Prince or Lord; but afterwards several of them
were either by Inheritance, Marriages, or Contracts
united together, till most of them fell to the share of
the House of Burgundy, from whence they came to the
House of Austria by the Marriage of Maximilian I. 
who had married Mary the only Daughter of Charles
surnamed The Hardy. 
         The Ʋnion of the 17 Provinces. 
          And were afterwards all united
under Charles V. who governed them in Peace and
Prosperity. 'Tis related, that he had once taken a Resolution
to make them one Kingdom, which however
he could not effect, their Laws and Privileges being so
different, and they so jealous of one another, that none
of them would remit any thing of their Pretences in
favour of the rest. But the Reign of Charles V. over
the Netherlands, proved so very fortunate, because he
bore an extraordinary Affection to them, and they to
him:T•eir Co•diti•n than under Charles V. For Charles was born in Ghent, educated amongst
them, and lived a considerable time there. His
Humour suited very well with theirs, he conversed with
them in a friendly manner without haughtiness, employing
the Netherlanders frequently in his Affairs,
whereby this Nation was in great esteem at his Court. 
But under the Reign of his son Philip II. these Provinces
were torn to Pieces by intestine Commotions
and civil Wars, which occasioned the Rise of a potent
Commonwealth in Europe. This Government having
proved the occasion of great Alterations, it is
worth our while to search both into the cause of these

Commotions and the Origin of this new Government. §. 2. The cause of the Wars in the Netherlands under Philip II. 
          
         Philip II. therefore was not a little to be
blamed, as being partly himself the cause of these civil
Troubles; for he being born in spain, and educated
after the spanish Fashion, did favour only the spainards,
representing in all his Behaviour a perfect haughty
spaniard; which did mightily alienate the Minds
of the Netherlanders, especially after he resided altogether
in spain, and did not so much as honour the
Netherlands with his Presence; thinking it perhaps
below his Grandeur, that he who was Master of so great
a Kingdom, and had such great Projects in his Head,
should trouble himself much about the Affairs of the
Netherlanders. Tho' in all Probability these might
have been kept in Obedience by his Presence; for his
Father, the sooner to appease a Tumult which was
only risen in the City of Ghent, did venture to take
his journey through France, and the Territories of
Francis,
         William Prince of Orange. who was but lately reconciled to him. Moreover,
William, Prince of Orange, a crafty, thoroughpaced,
and ambitious Man, did not a little foment these
Divisions. For when Philip had taken a Resolution
to go into spain, and to commit the Administration
of the Netherlands to a Governour, this Prince was
contriving how Christina, Dutchess of Lorrain, might
be constituted Regent of the Netherlands, and how
he, by marrying her Daughter, might bear the greatest
sway in the Government: But he miscarrying in
both, because Philip constituted Margaret of Parma,
natural Daughter of Charles V. Regent of the Netherlands,
and refused to give his consent to the Match,
was so dissatisfied thereat, that by doing of Mischief, he
resolved to show his own strength. Discontents of the Nobility and Clergy. The Earls of Egmont
and Hoorn were also very much dissatisfied, as also
a great many others, who being in great esteem
with the People, were all very jealous of the spaniards. 
A great many also of the Nobility were for a Change,
partly out of a hatred to the spaniards, partly because
they were naturally of a turbulent spirit, and were
become poor and over Head and Ears in Debt, as having

endeavoured to outvie the spaniards in splendour
at Court, and thereby spent more than their Incomes
would allow of. The Clergy besides this, was somewhat
discontented, because Philip, having created several
new Episcopal sees, would have emploied the Revenues
of several Abbies for the Maintenance of them,
which did not only dissatisfie such as were in present
Possession of these Abbies, but others also, who were in
hopes of them for the future: for the Abbots were chosen
by a free Election of the Monks in each Monastery,
but the Bishops were nominated by the King. Change of Religion. But all
this could not have furnished sufficient Fuel for so great
a Flame, if Religion had not been joyned to them,
which proves most efficacious in disturbing the Minds
of the Common People, and always serves for a specious
Pretence to such as are for alterations in a state. 
There were great numbers in the Netherlands, who
had relinquished the Roman Catholick Religion, some
of them professing the Augsburgh Confession, some
the Doctrine of the Huguenots, others fell into the
Errors of the Anabaptists. Charles V. had by severe
Proclamations and Punishments been very hard upon
them, which had served for nothing else than to exasperate
the Minds of the People, and to promote the
new Religion. Wherefore it was the Opinion of Mary
Queen of Hungary, the sister of Charles V. and
then Regent of the Netherlands, That they ought rather
to be treated more mildly: But Philip had taken
a Resolution to root out by force this Heresie, either
out of a Zeal for the Roman Catholick Religion, or
because he hoped thereby to oblige the Pope, whose
Favour he stood in need of at that time. He renewed
therefore his Father's Proclamation, and that with
more severity against these Hereticks; and to put
them in Execution, he was for setting up a Court of
Judicature,spanish Inquisition. 
          according to the Model of the spanish Inquisition;
the very Name of which was terrible to
every body: And in effect, this Inquisition is a very
cruel Constitution, whereby the Life, Estate, and
good Name of every subject is put into the Hands of
unmercifull Priests, whose chief Glory is to be Inhuman
and Rigorous in their proceedings; and who
have a power to take up and punish any person upon

suspicion only; and tho' a Man is wrongfully accused,
he is not to know either his Accuser or Crime, and tho'
he makes his Innocence appear, yet he seldom escapes
without some punishment. The Netherlanders were
the more frightned, not only because in this Court,
no Privileges, no Favour of the King, nor Intercessions,
did avail; but also, because they knew the Netherlanders
to be free in their speech, carrying, as it were,
their Hearts upon their Tongues, and that by way of
Trade they were obliged to be conversant with those
of other Religions. Whereas on the other hand, it
was natural and easie for an Italian or spaniard to
keep his Thoughts within himself. some are of Opinion,
That the spaniards were glad to see that the
Netherlanders did begin the Fray, hoping thereby to
get an Opportunity to force them to Obedience, and
by suppressing their Liberty and Privileges to rule
over them at pleasure. They hoped that this Country
might serve them one day for a Magazine, from
whence they might conveniently attack France, England,
and the Northern Kingdoms. Yet it is also
most certain, that some foreign Princes did administer
Fuel to nourish and augment the Flame; especially
Elizabeth Queen of England, whose Intention
was,Queen Flizabeth 
           ••mented their Revolt. by this means to cut out so much Work for the
spaniard, that he might not be at leisure to think of
Conquering others, his great Power being at that time
become terrible to all Europe. 
        §. 3. Thus the seeds of Civil Commotions were
sown in the Minds of the Netherlanders, about which
time Philip II. 1559. went into spain; having so constituted
the Government, that the supream Administration
of Affairs should be in the Hands of the Regent
and the Council of state, of which Council, besides
the Prince of Orange, were the Earl of Egmont and
others,The Cardinal Granville. 
          the Cardinal Granville, a Burgundian, a wise
Man, and much relied on by the King, who had given
secret Instructions to the Regent to rule according
to his Advice: But the Netherlandish Lords quickly
perceiving, that the whole Government was managed
according to the Counsels of the Cardinal, did sufficiently
shew their Discontent in opposing themselves against

it; especially when the Cardinal pressed hard to
execute the King's Commands concerning the Establishment
of the Bishops, and rooting out of the new
Religion; the Netherlandish Lords advised a Toleration
of the same, and to deal more gently with the
People. This raised a general Hatred against the Cardinal,
whereupon the Prince of Orange, and the Earls
of Egmont and Hoorn writ to the King, That if he
was not removed, it would be impossible to preserve the
Peace of the Netherlands; neither did they rest stisfied
till Philip did consent to their Demands: But
because the Regent was,1564. after the removal of the Cardinal,
swaied by the President Vigilius and the Earl
of Barlemont, who in every respect followed the footsteps
of the Cardinal, this Joy did not last long, but
the old Discontents being renewed, it was said, That
the Body of the Cardinal was removed from the Council,
but his spirit remained in it. Thus the Divisions continued
in the Council of state, nor could the Proclamations
against the new Religion be put in Execution,
because the People began more and more to oppose
them. Count Egmont sent into spain. 
          It was therefore with consent of the Regent
and senate agreed upon, to send the Earl of Egmont
into spain, who was to give an account to the
King, of the whole state of Affairs, and to see whether
the King could find out another Remedy. The
King received him very courteously as to his person,
but would not remit any thing from his severity as to
Religion. And imagining that the cause why this
Evil had taken so deep root, was the Mildness of the
Regent, he caused his Proclamation to be renewed, commanding
withall, That the Counsel of Trent should
be introduced in the Netherlands. Besides these severities
a Rumour was spread abroad, That Philip had
agreed with Charles IX. at Bayonne, by all Means and
Ways to root out the Hereticks, which was the cause
why it was resolved to oppose the King's Intentions. 
some of the Nobility made the first beginning,An Association of the Nobility. who
entered into an Association (which they called the Compromise)
whereby they engaged themselves, to oppose
the Inquisition, and to stand by one another, if any
one should be molested for his Religion; but solemnly
protested, That they had no other Aim by so doing,

but the Glory of God, the Grandeur of the King,
and the Peace of their native Country. This Association
was drawn up by Philip Marnix Lord of Aldegonde,
and subscribed by 400 Persons of Quality, among
whom the chiefest were Henry of Brederode,
Lewis Earl of Nassau, Brother of the Prince of Orange,
the Earls of Culenburgh and Bergh. These
met at Brussels,
         1566. and delivered a Petition to the Regent,
wherein they desired, That the Proclamations
issued forth touching Religion might be annulled. 
The Regent answered them in courteous but general
terms, telling them, That she would know the King's
Pleasure in the Matter. 'Tis said, That the Earl of
Barlemont, who stood then near the Regent, did tell
her, That they were no ways to be feared, because they
were only Geusen or Beggars; which has rendered the
Name of the Geusen very famous afterwards, they having
had a Beggars Pouch the Coat of Arms of that
Confederacy. In the mean while abundance of Pamphlets
were spread abroad, which did more and more
exasperate the People. And because Philip had given
but a very indifferent Reception to those Deputies,
which were sent into spain, to pray for a Mitigation
of these Proclamations, and had refused to comply in
the least with the sentiments of the People, it came
to an open Insurrection. so that the new Religion
was not only publickly professed and taught in a great
concourse of People, but the Rabble also fell to plundering
of Churches and pulling down of Images. Breaking of Im•ges. 
And tho' the Prince of Orange and the Earl of Egmont,
did what they could to appease this Tumult,
yet had the King conceived a shrewd suspicion as if
they had been in the bottom of it; wherefore they
were consulting their own safety, but could, as yet,
not come to any Resolution. In the mean time, the
Regent having raised some Troops, and endeavoured
either by Fear or fair Words, or any other ways to
reduce the dissatisfied Party to Obedience, some of
whom did by submission and other services endeavour
to be reconciled to the King. And this Design
succeeded so well, that without any great trouble and
the punishment of a very few, the Country was restored
to its Tranquility: Nevertheless, because it was

rumoured abroad, that a great Army was marching
out of spain against them, a great many of the Inhabitants,
and especially of the Handycrafts Trade, did
retire into the neighbouring Countries. The Prince
of Orange himself disliking this calm retired into Germany. 
        §. 4. It was then the Advice of the Regent, that
the King should come in person, without any great
Force, into the Netherlands, and by his Presence and
Clemency endeavour entirely to heal the ulcerated
Minds of the People. But he followed the Advice of
the Duke of Alva,
         The Duke of Alva. 
          who advised to make use of this
Opportunity to bring the Netherlands under the
Yoak, and to strike Terrour into the rest. he
marched with a brave Army through savoy and Burgundy
into the Netherlands,
         1568. and having immediately
taken into Custody the Earls of Egmont and Hoorn,
whom he pretended to have been underhand the Authors
of these Troubles, declared all those guilty of
High Treason that had had any hand in the Association,
the Petition, and pulling down of the Images. 
And a Court was erected of twelve Judges, from
which no Appeal was to be allowed, where Judgment
was to be given concerning these Matters, this Court
was commonly called The bloody Council. Before this
Court, the Prince of Orange and some other Lords,
who were fled, were summoned to appear, and upon
non-appearance they were declared guilty of High
Treason, and their Estates Confiscated. The same severity
was used against others of less note. This caused
such a Terror among the Inhabitants, that they left
their Habitations in Troops. He caused also Citadels
to be built in several great Cities, among which one
of the chiefest was that of Antwerp. In the mean
time the Prince of Orange had brought together considerable
Forces in Germany, some of which, under the
Command of Lewis his Brother, falling into Friesland,
beat the Count of Arembergh, the Governour of
that Province. The Earls of Egmont and Hoorn beheaded. But soon after the Duke of Alva, having
first caused the Earls of Egmont and Hoorn to be
beheaded, marched against him in person. Not long
after the Prince of Orange fell with a great Army into

         Brabant, but was beaten back by the Duke of Alva,
and his Forces dispersed. The Duke of Alva, puffed
up with this great success, did not only cause a most
magnificent statue to be erected at Antw•rp; but having
also formed a Design to conquer the Netherlands
with their own Money, he imposed a Tax upon them,
of the hundredth Penny, to be paid of the whole value
of all Estates; and besides this, the twentieth Penny
to be paid of all Moveables, but the tenth of all
Immoveables, as often as they were sold. This did
exasperate the Netherlanders to the utmost degree. 
And whilst the Duke of Alva, being in great want of
Money, was busie in squeezing out these Taxes, and
was upon the point of forcing the Inhabitants of
Brussels, who refused to pay it, News was brought,
That the banished Netherlanders, who were turned
Privateers, and had about 24 ships of indifferent
strength, had under the Conduct of the Earl of March
taken the City of Briel in Holland. 
         Briel taken, April 1. 1571. Then most Cities
of Holland, out of a Hatred to the spaniards, and the
tenth Penny, revolted from the spaniards, except
Amsterdam and schonhoven, which remained for some
time under the Obedience of spain. It was a grand
mistake in the Duke of Alva, that during his Regency
of four Years, he had not secured the sea Coasts. 
The revolted Places chose for their Governour the
Prince of Orange, swearing to him Allegiance as the
King's stadtholder, as if they had only revolted from
the Duke of Alva and not the King. A great many
Privateers then joined from France and England, who
within the space of four Months made up a Fleet of
150 ships, who had their Rendezvouz at Flushing,
and afterwards did great Mischiefs to the spaniards. 
The Duke of Alva was not in a condition to resist this
storm, because the Earl of Bergh had not only at the
same time taken a great many places in Gueldres,
Friesland and Over-yssel, but also Lewis Earl of Nassaw,
had with the Assistance of the French, surprised Mons:
Which City the Duke of Alva endeavoured to recover
by force of Arms, and the Prince of Orange, who with
an Army newly raised in Germany, had made prodigious
havock in Brabant, had in vain endeavoured to
relieve it, was retired into Holland. Wherefore this

City was surrendered upon Articles to the Duke of Alva. 
He then tried all ways to reduce the revolted
places to Obedience by force, having among others,
pillaged Malines and Zutphen, quite destroied Naerden,
and taken Haerlem after a tedious siege, the Inhabitants
of which City were most barbarously treated. §. 5. The Affairs of the spaniards in the Netherlands
being by the rigorous proceedings of the Duke of
Alva (who used to bragg, that during his Regency of
six Years he had caused 18000 to be executed by the
Hangman) put into Confusion,Duke of Alva recalled. he was recalled in the
Year 1573. Lewis Requesenes succeeded him, a Man
of somewhat a milder Temper,Lewis Requesenes Governour. 
          but who had a very
ill beginning of his Regency, the Fleet which he had
sent out to relieve Middleburgh being destroied before
his Eyes, and the City surrendered to the Prince of Orange:
Yet the Prince also received a great Blow; for
his Brother Lewis, who led an Army to his Assistance
out of Germany, was routed near Grave upon the
Mockerhyde, where he and his Brother Henry were
slain in the Field. After this Victory the spanish souldiers
mutinied for want of Pay, and lived upon free
Quarters in Antwerp till all was paid. Then the siege
of Leyden was undertaken, which was reduced to the
utmost extremity by Famine, till a Dyke of the
Maese was cut through, by which means, and the
help of a North West Wind at spring tide, the Country
round about being put under Water, the spaniards,
after a great loss sustained, were forced to leave it. 
In the Year next following the Emperour endeavoured
by his Mediation to compose these Troubles,1574. 
and a Meeting was held for that purpose betwixt the
Deputies of both Parties at Breda, which proved
fruitless. Then the spaniards took Ziricuzea after a
siege of nine Months; but before the place was taken
Lewis Requesenes died. 1576. After his Death the Council
of state took the Administration of the Government
into their Hands, which was approved by the
King. §. 6. In the mean time the Hatred of the Netherlanders
against the spaniards was more and more encreased,

especially after the souldiers, who were
grown mutinous for want of Pay, and had committed
great Outrages, that the Council of state had declared
them Enemies, giving leave to the Inhabitants
to take up Arms against them. During which Disturbances
Maestricht and Antwerp were plundered:
Which disposed the rest,The Treaty of Ghent. 
          to enter upon a Treaty with
the Prince of Orange at Ghent, which contained, That
the Provinces had made a Peace betwixt themselves,
That the Proclamations issued forth during the Regency
of the Duke of Alva should be annulled, and
the spaniards sent out of the Country: Which Contract,
tho' it was ratified by the King, yet he had
taken a Resolution quickly to disunite them again. 
For this purpose he constituted Don John d' Austria,
         Don John d' Austria made Governour,
         
his natural Brother, Governour of the Netherlands,
The Prince of Orange forewarned the Netherlanders,
That he ought not to be trusted; notwithstanding
this, he was received by plurality of Voices, they having
obliged him to subscribe the Contract made at
Ghent, and to send away the spanish souldiers. But
the Prince of Orange and the Provinces of Holland
and Zealand were not well satisfied with this Agreement,
and the rest also quickly began to mistrust him. 
He gave them sufficient occasion to believe that their
Jealousie was not ill grounded, when he by surprize
made himself Master of the Castle of Namur, under
pretence to secure his person against any Attempts,
which so disturbed the Netherlanders, that they took
up Arms to drive him out of Namur, They also
took all the strong Holds, where any German Garrison
was left, and demolished the Castles. And sending
for the Prince of Orange to come to Brussels,
they constituted him Grand Bayliff of Brabant. 
This encrease of the House of Orange made some
great Men envious, who made a Party to balance it;
among whom, one of the chiefest was the Duke of
Arshot. 
         Archduke Matthew. These called in Matthew, Archduke of Austria,
whom they made Governour of the Netherlands,
who coming with all speed was also received by
the Party of the Prince of Orange, under condition
that the Prince should be his Lieutenant, and he not
do any thing without the consent of the Estates. 1577. On

the other hand,Alexander Duke of Parma. 
         Alexander Duke of Parma came with
an Army out of Italy to the Assistance of Don John
d' Austria, who bringing with him a good number of
old spanish Troops, beat the Army of the Estates
near Gemblours, and took Louvain, Philipville, Limbourgh,
and several other places. The Estates then
finding themselves alone not strong enough, offered
to put themselves under the Protection of Henry III. 
King of France, and he having refused to accept it,
the same offer was made to the Duke of Alenson his
Brother, who having accepted of it, came into the
Netherlands: But could do nothing of moment, the
Provinces and great Men being so divided among
themselves, that no body knew who was Master. 
There arose also a new Division among the Estates,
when upon Request of those of the Reformed Religion,
Liberty of Conscience was allowed in the Netherlands;
which was willingly consented to by those of
Ghent and others; but Artois, Haynault, and some other
Wallooon Cities, that were very zealous for the
Catholick Religion, did oppose it with great violence;
and having by degrees separated themselves from the
rest, set up a new Faction, who were called the Malecontents. 
During these Troubles Don John d' Austria
died,Malecontents leaving the Government to the Duke of Parma,
who was confirmed in his place by Philip. 
         The Duke of Parma. 
         
He began his Regency with the taking of Maestricht,
and bringing over the Wallon Provinces, viz. Artois,
Haynault, and the Walloon Flanders, to the King's
Party by accord. §. 7. The Prince of Orange therefore perceiving that
the Contract of Ghent was quite broke,The Ʋnion of Utrecht the Foundation of the Commonwealth. and that the
Great Men who envied one another, and the several
Provinces, that were of a different Religion, were
scarce ever to be United: And yet being desirous to
secure himself, and to establish the Protestant Religion,
he got the Estates of the Provinces of Gueldres,
         1579. 
         Holland,
Zealand, Friesland and Ʋtrecht, to meet. Here
it was agreed, that they would defend one another as
one Body; that they would consult concerning Peace
and War, Taxes, and the like, with common Consent;
and that they would maintain Liberty of Conscience. 

This Union, made at Ʋtrecht, (wherein also
afterwards Over-Yssel and Groningen were included)
is the Foundation of the commonwealth of the United
Netherlands. At that time their Affairs were in
so low a Condition, that they coined a Medal, wherein
their state was represented by a ship without sails,
or Rudder, left to the Mercy of the Waves, with this
Inscription, Incertum quo fata ferant. The Fortune
of the Prince of Orange absolutely depending now on
this Union, he made it his business to hinder the Conclusion
of the Treaty of a general Peace, which by the
Mediation of the Emperour was set on foot at Collen,
because a general Peace might easily have dissolved this
Union. And, because the Affairs of the Netherlands
grew worse and worse every day, the spaniards having
taken one after another, the Cities of Bois le Duc,
Breda, Tournay, Valenciennes, Malines, and Others,
and a great many of the Great Men being gone over
to the spanish Party: The Prince of Orange on the
other hand being well assured, that the spaniards one
time or another would revenge themselves upon him
and his friends; and finding himself not in a capacity
to maintain the Cause against them, he persuaded the
Estates of the Netherlands that they should renounce
all Obedience to Philip, who had violated their Privileges
confirmed to them by Oath, and make the Duke
of Alenson their soveraign, with whom he had underhand
made an agreement, That the United Provinces
should fall to his share. And the Estates of Holland,
Zealand and Ʋtrecht, were then for making him their
soveraign, except the Cities of Amsterdam and Gouda;
and questionless it would have been done afterwards,
if his unexspected Death had not prevented it. §. 8. The Duke of Alenson. 
          The Duke of Alenson having obtained the
soveraignty, raised the siege of Cambray, which was
besieged by the spaniards, and in the year next following
was at Antwerp proclaimed Duke of Brabant, and
at Ghent Earl of Flanders. But his Power being confined
within very narrow Bounds by the Estates, he,
by the advice of his Friends, resolved to make himself
Absolute. He proposed to the Estates, That if he should
die without Issue, these Countries might be United

with the Crown of France; which being denied him,
he took a strange Resolution; viz. By surprize to make
himself absolute Master of Antwerp, and some other
Cities. For this purpose several Thousands of French
were already got privately into Antwerp, which were
beaten out by the Citizens with considerable Loss. 
They made the like Attempts upon several other Places
on the same day, which every-where miscarried,
except at Dendermond, Dunkirk, and Dixmuide. And
thus the French having lost at once all their credit, and
the affection of the Netherlanders, the Duke of Alenson,
full of shame and confusion, returned into France,
where he died soon after. The French intermedling
with the Affairs of the Netherlands, had drawn with
it another Evil; which was, That Foreign souldiers
were again brought into the Netherlands, which was
against the Agreement made with the Walloons, Then
the Duke of Parma re-took Dunkirk,
         1583. 
         Newport, Winoxbergen,
Menin, Alost, and some other Places in
Flanders. 
         1584. 
         Ypres and Bruges did also submit. And in
the same Year the Affairs of the Estates received a great
Blow by the Death of William Prince of Orange, who
was stabbed in his Palace at Delft by a Burgundian,
whose Name was Balthasar Gerhard. 
         Prince of Orange murthered. By whose Death
the Netherlands being without a Head, were left in
great confusion. §. 9. After the Death of Prince William, the Estates
did make Maurice,
         His son Prince Maurice made stadtholider. son of the deceased, stadtholder
of Holland, Zealand, and Ʋtrecht; and he being but
eighteen Years of Age, they constituted the Earl of
Hohenloe his Lieutenant. But the soveraignty they
proffered to the King of France, who being at that
time distracted with intestine Wars, was not at leisure
to accept of it. The Duke of Parma in the mean
while taking advantage of this juncture of Affairs, reduced
Antwerp by Famine within a Twelve month's
time; as also Dendermond, Ghent, Brussels, Malines
and Nimeguen by Force. After the Loss of Antwerp,
the Estates, who were for submitting Themselves to
any body but the spaniards,
         The English Confederacy. offered the soveraignty
over them to Queen Elizabeth, which she refused to
accept of: Yet she entred with them into a more strict

Alliance, by virtue of which she obliged her self to
maintain a certain number of souldiers at her own
Charge in the Netherlands, which, with all the other
Forces of the Estates, were to be Commanded by an
English General. And the Estates did surrender to
the Queen, as a security for the Charges she was to be
at, the Cities of Flushing, Briel and Rammakens, or sceburgh
upon Walchorn, which were afterwards restored
to the Estates for the summ of One Million of Crowns. 1616. 
The Queen sent Robert Dudley,
         1586. Earl of Leicester, as
General into Holland;
         The Regency of the Earl of Leicester. 
          who being arrived there, was
made by the Estates their Governour-General, and
that with a greater Power then was acceptable to the
Queen; but he did no great Feats. For the Duke of Parma
not only took Grave and Venlo, and forced him from
before Zutphen; but he also administered the publick
Affairs at a strange rate, to the great dissatisfaction of
the Estates, to whom he had rendred himself suspected. 
Their Discontents were much augmented, after William
stanley, who was by the Earl of Leicester made
Commander in Chief in Deventer, had betraied that
City to the spaniards. The Year next following, the
Earl of Leicester attempted the Relief of sluce in
Flanders, but to no purpose; and being returned into
Holland, where he by several suspicious Undertakings
augmented the Differences betwixt him and the
Estates, he returned very ill satisfied into England;
where, by Command of the Queen, he resigned his
Office of Governour. §. 10. The state of Affairs in Holland legias to mend. Hitherto the Affairs of the United Netherlands
(whom henceforward we will call Hollanders)
had been in a very ill Condition; but from this time
forwards they began to mend a-pace, and became more
settled. This was partly occasioned by the Ruin of the
two Provinces of Brabant and Flanders, which were
reconciled to the King, upon condition, That such as
would not profess themselves Roman Catholicks, should
leave the Country within a prefixed time: A great
many of these flocking into Holland, made its Cities
very populous. Especially all the Traffick of Antwerp
was transplanted to Amsterdam, which rendred
that City very Rich and Potent at sea. Besides this

         Philip, like those, who will hunt two Hares with one
Dog,1588. did not only attempt to Invade England with
a great Fleet, but also sent in the Year next following
the Duke of Parma with an Army to the Assistance
of the League in France; both which proving fruitless,
the Hollanders had in the mean while leisure given
them, to put themselves into a good posture. 
Whereas the Duke of Parma had wisely advised the
King, that he should with all his Power first subdue
the Hollanders, before he engaged in another War. 
For Maurice, whom they had, after the Departure of
the Earl of Leicester, made their Generalissimo both
by sea and Land, had restored their lost Reputation. 
His first Attempt was upon Breda,
         1590. which he took by
a stratagem. In the Year next following he took
Zutphen, Deventer, Hulst and Nimeguen. And in the
Year 1592, steenwyck and Coeverden. In the same
Year the Death of the brave Duke of Parma proved
a great Loss to the spaniards. For the spanish souldiers
growing Mutinous every-where, did not a little
advance the Progresses of the Hollanders. 
         1592. 
         Gertrudenbergh
was taken in the sight of the spanish Army, In
the Year next following Groningen was reduced, whereby
the United Provinces were made entire, and secured
on this side of the Rhine. In the Year 1596, Albert,
Arch-Duke of Austria,
         Arch-Duke Albert, Governour of the spanish Netherlands. 
          arrived as Governour of the
Netherlands, who began his Regency with the Taking
of Hulst. And, because Philip, being oppressed with
Debts, was fain to shut up his Exchequer. Albert, for
want of Money, was not in a capacity to undertake
any thing of moment in the Year next following, but
was soundly beaten near Tougenhout. And after the
Trade of the Hollanders with spain and Portugal, whither
they used to send their ships under Foreign Flags,
had been quite cut off; whereby the spaniards hoped
the sooner to reduce them to Obedience, Necessity, and
the desire of Lucre, taught them another way to obtain
vast Riches. For by this means the Hollanders
were forced to try whether they could sail themselves
into the East-Indies, and to attempt to find out a
nearer Way thither round about the North. But this
Design not succeding, they took the common Course
about Africa; and having with incredible Pains, in

spite of all the Resistance made by the Portuguese,
settled a Trade there, a great many Merchants and others,
who knew no better way to employ their Readymoney,
erected several societies to Trade into the East-Indies:
         1602. 
All which were by virtue of a Patent granted
by the Estates,The East-India Company. formed into one Company, which did
afterwards prodigiously encrease its Power in the EastIndies,
and has conveyed unconceivable Riches into
Holland. In the Year 1597, Maurice took Rhinebergh,
Meurs, and all the rest of those Places of
Over-Yssel, which were as yet in the possession of
spain. 
        §. 11. In the Year 1598, they found out another
Decoy for the Hollanders. For because it was generally
pretended, that they would not live under spanish
subjection, Philip found out this artifice: He Married
his daughter Isabella Clara Eugenia to Albert,
         Isabella Clara Eugenia. Arch-Duke
of Austria, giving unto her as a Dowry Burgundy
and the Netherlands; yet, with this Condition,
That the same should return to spain, if no Heirs proceeded
from this Match, which the spaniards were very
well assured of, the Princess being pretty well in Age;
and besides this, having been spoiled before by means of
some Medicaments administred to her to prevent Conception. 
The Netherlands being then by this means,
according to outward appearances freed from a Foreign
subjection, as having got their own Prince, it was hoped
the Hollanders would the easier re-unite themselves
with the other Provinces; because a Peace being lately
concluded betwixt France and spain at Nervin, the Hollanders
had thereby lost their chief Confederate. But
the Hollanders remained stedfast in their former Resolution,
rejecting all Propositions of Peace made by the
Emperour and the Arch Duke Albert. In the Year
1600,Battel near Newport. 
          
         Maurice fell into Flanders, with an intention to
besiege Newport, but was met by Albert, where a bloody
Battel ensued, and Maurice obtained a most glorious
Victory, who was otherways always averse to Field-fights,
and would never have resolved at that time to
have ventured the whole Fortune of Holland upon the
Issue of a Battel, if he had not been forced to it; wherefore,
without attempting any thing farther, he returned

into Holland. 
         siege of Ostend, 1601. 
         Albert then undertook the siege of
Ostend, during which both sides did their utmost, till
Ambrose spinola forced the place, the besieged having
no more room left to make any Retrenchments. 'Tis
said,The Conquests on both sides. that the Hollanders lost within the Town above
70000 Men, and the spaniards without a great many
more. But in the mean time the spanish Fleet under
the Command of Frederick spinola was destroied, and
Rhinebergh, Grave and sluce taken by Maurice. In
the Year 1605, spinola retook from the Hollanders,
Lingen, Groll and Rhinebergh, and Maurice sustained
some loss before Antwerp. The last glorious Action in
this War was, that of James Heemskirke, who burned
the spanish Fleet in the Harbour of Gibraltar, where
he himself was killed. The spaniards therefore finding
it impossible to reduce Holland by force, which they
found encreased in strength by the War; and being
besides this, jealous of Henry IV. and quite out of
breath by this tedious War, they resolved to make an
end of it at any rate. How desirous the spaniards
were of the Peace may easily be conjectured from hence,
That Albert himself proposed the Treaty to be at the
Hague, and first sent spinola himself thither as Embassadour,
whereas the Hollanders carried it very high,
and were very resolute. The Business met with great
difficulty, before it could be brought to the conclusion
of a Truce of twelve Years: The greatest obstacle was,
that the Hollanders urged it closely, That spain without
any Exception should declare them a free People,
which the spanish Embassadours refusing to do, at last
this Medium was found out; That spain and the
Archduke Albert did declare, they would treat with
the Netherlanders, As a free Nation. And they being
not satisfied also with this, the President Janin, who was
sent thither in behalf of France, answered, That the
word As could not add much to the strength of spain,
nor diminish theirs; and that it was their Business to
secure themselves and their state by Arms and not
by Words. A Truce of 12 Years, Both Parties kept what they were possessed
of, and the Hollanders maintained their Navigation into
the East Indies, which the spaniards would fain
have got from them; but the chief cause, why the
Hollanders at that time when their Affairs were in so

good a Condition, consented to a Truce, seems to be,
that they began to be jealous of France, for fear, lest
that King should snatch Flanders away upon a sudden,
which must needs have proved their Ruin. Besides this,
Maurice being grown very Powerfull during this War,
was likely to be troublesome to their Liberty. And
this was the first step which Holland made towards
the Establishment of a free commonwealth. 1609. 
        §. 12. soon after the Truce was concluded, the Hollanders
were engaged in the Business concerning the
succession of the Country of Juliers;
         A Quarrel about the Dutchy of Juliers. 
          for the Emperour,
after the death of the last Duke, being very desirous
to annex these Countries unto his House, had
sent the Archduke Leopold, to make a sequestration,
who took the strong City of Juliers, but was beaten
out again by the Hollanders, with the Assistance of the
French. But a difference arising afterwards betwixt the
Elector of Brandenburgh and the Duke of Newburgh,
who had at first made an Agreement betwixt themselves;
and the Duke of Newburgh having called to his
Assistance spinola, who took the City of Wesel: The
Hollanders on the other hand sided with the Elector of
Brandenburgh, and put Garrisons into Rees and Emeric,
whereby the Country of Cleves was involved in the
War of the Netherlands. 
        §. The Differences between the Remonstrants and Contra-Remonstrants
          13. But there arose a more dangerous intestine
Division in Holland betwixt the Arminians or Remonstrants
(as they are termed) and others; which Division
was partly occasioned by a state-jealousie, partly
by Disputes among the Divines. We have said before,
that Prince William did endeavour under-hand to be
soveraign over the United Provinces, which was prevented
only by a very few Voices. Then after his Death
his son Maurice pursued the same Design, but was opposed
by the chief Men among them; who alledged,
That their Labour was very ill bestowed, if in place of
a great One, they should be brought under subjection
to a little Prince. Among these, one of the chiefest was
John of Olden Barneveldt, Pensionary of Holland, who
had been always for upholding the publick Liberty. 
But because the Authority of the Captain-General was

more conspicuous during the War,Afterwards managed by state Policy. 
         Maurice endeavoured
to set aside the Treaty with spain; but Barnevelt
did, as much as he could, promote the Truce with
spain, knowing that in time of Peace, the Authority of
the Captain-General would be diminished, which Maurice
kept in good remembrance. In the mean time
Arminius, a professour of Divinity in the University of
Leyden, had defended several Propositions concerning
Predestination, and some other Articles relating to the
same, with less rigour than the rest of the Reformed
Churchs had hitherto generally taught. His Opinion
was after his death opposed by one Francis Gomarus. 
This Dissension being spread abroad, most of the
Clergy sided with Gomarus, but the chief states-men
with Arminius. But because the generality of the
People followed the footsteps of the Clergy, Maurice,
who after the Death of his elder Brother, was become
Prince of Orange, declared himself for the Gomarists. 
And there happening great Tumults in several places;
viz. at Alckmaer, Leyden and Ʋtrecht, the Prince
took this opportunity to displace up and down such
Magistrates as adhered to the Arminians. Barnevelt,
Hugo Grotius, and some others, where, under the same
pretext, taken into Custody; the first by a sentence of
the states-General lost his Head in the 72d. Year of his
Age; Grotius was condemned to a perpetual Imprisonment;
out of which he afterwards made his escape
by means of his Wife, who had enclosed him in a Chest. 
And tho' at the synod of Dort the Doctrine of Arminius
was condemned as erroneous,1629. yet this Violence
of the Prince against a Man, who had deserved so well,
was very ill resented by a great many: And these two
Factions have ever since taken so firm root there, that
it is not improbable, but at last they may occasion the
ruin or change of the state. §. The spanish War renewed, 1621, 14. But Dangers from abr•ad did afterwards appease
these inward Dissensions. For the time of the
Truce being expired, the War began a-fresh with spain. 
In the Year 1622, spinola took Juliers, but was obliged
to raise the siege from before Bergen op Zoom; because
the Count of Mansfeld and Christian Duke of Brunswick,
         
having defeated the spanish Army near Fleury,
marched to the Assistance of the Hollanders. To revenge
this Affront, spinola besieged Breda; and Prince
Maurice having in vain endeavoured to raise the siege;
and besides this, his Attempt upon the Castle of Antwerp
having proved unsuccessfull,Prince Maurice dies, 1625. he fell into a deep
Melancholy, and died, Breda being not long after forced
by Famine to surrender it self. Prince Frederick Henry I. To Prince Maurice,
succeeded in the stadtholdership and all other Offices,
which had been in his possession, his Brother Frederick
Henry,
         1627. who took Groll. In the Year 1628, Pieter
Heyn took the spanish silver-fleet; and in the Year
next following the Prince took Bois le Duc. During
this siege, the spaniards made an Inrode into the Velaw,
hoping thereby to give the Hollanders a diversion,
who were put into a great Consternation. But the
Hollanders on that very day surprized the City of Wesel,
which obliged the spaniards to repass the River
Yssel as fast as they could: And from that time forwards
the spaniards despaired of ever reducing Holland
under their Obedience. In the Year 1630, the
Hollanders got first footing in Brasile. In the Year
1631, they surprized some Thousands of spaniards
near Bergen op Zoom, who were gone out in shallops
upon some secret Enterprize. In the Year next
following the Prince took Venlo, Ruremond, Limburgh
and Macstricht, and Pappenheim endeavouring
to relieve the last, was soundly beaten. In the Year
1638 the Prince took Rhinebergh, but in the Year next
following the spaniards,
         A League Offensive between France and Holland, 1635. 
         Limburgh. An Offensive
Alliance was made betwixt France and Holland, wherein
they had shared the Netherlands betwixt them:
But this Alliance proved fruitless, the Hollanders being
very well satisfied, that this Design did not succeed,
being glad not to have the French for their Neighbours
on the Land-side: But the spaniards surprized
shenkenshantz,
         1636. which the Hollanders retook not without
great trouble. In the Year 1637 the Prince retook
Breda, but the spaniards, Venlo and Ruremond. In
the Year 1638, the Hollanders were bravely beaten
near Callo; but in the Year 1639, Martin Tromp entirely
destroied the spanish Fleet, which lay in the

         Downs, and was intended to attack sweden, in conjunction
with the Danes. 
         Prince William II. In the Year 1644, Ghent,
and in the Year next following Hulst was taken
by William II. Peace concluded at Munster, 1648. who had succeeded his Father: It
is thought, that he might also have taken Antwerp,
if the Province of Zealand and Amsterdam had not
opposed it, they being grown powerfull out of its
Ruins. At last, a Peace was concluded at Munster,
betwixt spain and Holland, wherein it was declared a
free commonwealth, to which spain should for the
future make no Pretensions whatsoever. And tho'
France and the Prince did oppose this Peace with their
utmost Endeavours, yet the Hollanders did consider,
that the spaniards having granted all that they could
desire, the Cause of the War ceased: They feared, besides
this, that spain might be brought too low, and
France grow too powerfull; and the Province of Holland
was considerably indebted. Thus Holland ended
this tedious War with great Reputation, but the spaniards
with great Dishonour, having besides this,
quite enervated themselves. Tho' this is observable,
that as long as the Hollanders were engaged in the War
against spain, they were favoured by every body except
the spanish Party; but immediately after the
Peace was concluded, both France and England, by
whom they had been hitherto uph•ld, gave manifest
proofs of their Jealousie of them. §. War with Portugal. 
          15. But the Hollanders could not enjoy Peace
very long; for soon after Brasile rebelled against them,
submitting it self to the Portuguese, which proved very
disadvantageous for the West-India Company; but
the East-India Company drew great Advantage from
it; for this having occasioned a War with Portugal,
which lasted till the Year 1661, the Hollanders took
from the Portuguese almost all the places, which
they were possessed of in the East-Indies. 
         Divisions in Holland. 
          In the Year
1650, a remarkable Dissension arose in Holland, which
might have proved the cause of great Calamities. For
the War with spain being now at an end, some of the
states, and especially the Province of Holland, were of

Opinion, That to ease the Publick, their Forces should
be diminished; which the Prince opposed, under pretence,
that it would not be adviseable to be without an
Army, as long as France and spain were engaged in a
War. And the Opinion being divided concerning this
Business, it was agreed upon by the Majority of the
states-General, who were great Friends of the Prince,
that the Prince should visit in person these Cities, to
try, whether he could convince the Magistrates in this
point: Against this petitioned some of the Cities in
Holland, and especially Amsterdam, fearing, that if
the Prince should come in person to them, he might,
by changing the Magistrates and other Alterations, do
something which might prove prejudicial to their Liberty. 
The Prince being dissatisfied at these proceedings,
replied, That this was done to affront him and
his Office, and therefore desired, that Reparation
should be made him; but the Cities insisted upon their
former Resolution, alledging, that it was according
to their Privileges. Da Witt and others made Prisoners by the Prince. Then the Prince took into Custody
six of the states of Holland, whom he supposed to
be chiefly against him, among whom the chiefest were
the sieur the Witt, Burghermaster of Dort, whom he
sent all together Prisoners to the Castle of Louvesteyn. 
He also privately ordered some Troops to march towards
Amsterdam, to surprize that City; but some of
these Troops having lost their way in the Night-time,
the Design was discovered by the Hamburgher Post-boy:
And the Amsterdamers perceiving that the Prince intended
to force them to a Complyance, opened their
sluces, and put the Country round about it under
Water: At last the Business was agreed, and the Prince
had this satisfaction given him, that the sieur Bicker
Burghermaster of Amsterdam was deposed, and the Prisoners
in the Castle of Louvestein were set at liberty, under
condition that they should be discharged from their
places. But this Business was likely to have been the
occasion of more troubles, if the Prince had not died
soon after. The Birth of Prince William III. soon after his death, viz. in the Year 1650,
on the 13th day of November, his Princess was brought
to Bed of William III. the present Prince of Orange. 
         
In the Year 1651, the United Provinces held a grand
Assembly, where they renewed the Union, being now
destitute of a Governour. §. War with the English Parliament. 16. Not long after the Hollanders were engaged
in a heavy War with the English Parliament, which
at the beginning being very ambitious of their Friendship,
sent one Dorislaw to the Hague, who before he
had his publick Audience, was murthered by some scots
who were all masked. And the Parliament having received
no satisfaction upon this account, began to look
with an ill Eye upon them, which they little regarded,
till Cromwell had reduced the scots. And, tho'
the Parliament sent other Embassadours to the Hague,
yet the Dutch were not very forward, but were for
protracting the Treaty, till the Embassadours having
been affronted by the Rabble, departed dissatisfied:
Whereupon the Parliament gave out Reprisals against
them, declaring withal, That no Merchandises should
be transported into England, except in English Bottoms,
and the English Privateers began to fall every
where upon the Dutch Merchant-ships. The Hollanders,
who were not very unanimous among themselves,
did resolve at last, to try first whether the Business
might be compounded by fair means, and if that did
not succeed, to begin the War in good earnest, and
for this purpose Embassadours were sent into England. 
Tromp in the mean while was sent out with a Fleet, to
secure their Commerce, and meeting with the English
Admiral Blake, and refusing to strike, a bloody Engagement
ensued, which ended with equal loss on both
sides. The Hollanders pretended, that this had happened
by accident; both Parties however made great
Preparations for War, and fought twice, the Advantage
remaining on the English side, notwithstanding
they were beaten near L•ghorn. But in the last Engagement
the Hollanders having lost their Admiral
Tromp, and seven and twenty Men of War, they were
obliged to conclude a Peace with Cromwell,
         A Peace▪ 1654. which was
very advantageous and glorious on his side, they being
among other Articles obliged, for the future, never

to make any one of the House of Orange their stadtholder. 
It was observed, that the Dutch ships were
not large enough, which Error the Hollanders corrected
afterwards. Differences with swedeland. 
          In the Year next following the Hollanders
were grown jealous of the great success of the
swedes against Poland, and being desirous to prevent
the swedes from becoming Masters of Prussia, they
stirred up the King of Denmark against them. But
the Danes having been worsted in this War, the Hollanders
sent a Fleet to relieve Copenhagen, which was
besieged by the swedes: A bloody Battel was fought
in the Oresound, betwixt the swedish and Dutch
Fleets, wherein the Hollanders lost two Admirals, but
nevertheless gained their point in relieving of Copenhagen. 
And in the Year next following they also bore
their share in the Battel of Funen,
         1660. till at last a Peace
was concluded before Copenhagen, to the small satisfaction
of the Danes, who accused the Hollanders, that
they had not been zealous enough in their Assistance
against the swedes; but the Hollanders were afraid,
that England and France might declare for sweden,
and under that pretence fall upon them; besides that,
they thought it their Interest, not to let Denmark
grow too powerfull. §. The second War with England, 16•5. 17. Holland was then for a few Years at Peace,
till a bloody War broke out betwixt them and the
English, who could not but think the flourishing
Trade and great Power of the Hollanders at sea, to
be very prejudicial to them. France blew up the
Coals, being desirous to see these two mighty states
weaken one another's Power. In this War the English
had the Advantage in the first and third Engagements,
but the Hollanders in the second: But the
English, at last, being willing to save Charges, did resolve
only to infest the Hollanders by their Privateers,
and not to equipp a Fleet, which the Hollanders taking
an advantage of, ventured to enter the River of
Thames; and having landed near Chattam, they
burned several ships in the Harbour. This obliged
England to make a Peace with them, which was by

mediation of the Crown of sweden concluded at Breda. 
In this War Holland recovered its Reputation, which it
had lost in Cromwell's time, and shewed it self not to
be inferiour in strength at sea to England; but they
discovered their Weakness on Land, the Bishop of
Munster having been very troublesome to them. §. England and France declare War with Holland. 
          18. At last, in the Year 1672, a prodigious
storm fell upon Holland, which at first threatened its
ruin; France attacking it by Land, and England by
sea. It was surprising to see how the French in a few
days time took the Provinces of Gueldres, Over-yssel
and Ʋtrecht, which occasioned so general a Consternation,
that some are of Opinion, they might have
taken Amsterdam it self, if they had immediately
gone towards it, whilst the first Consternation lasted. 
some lay the fault upon Rochford, who having
received Orders to make an attempt upon that City,
tarried two days at Ʋtrecht, which he bestowed in receiving
of Complements, the Amsterdamers getting
thereby time to take a Resolution for their Defence. 
It served also for a great Encouragement to the
Hollanders, that the Bishop of Munster was forced to
go away from before Groningen, he having, together
with the Elector of Collen, taken the French side. In
the Year next following the French took Maestricht
from the Hollanders. But the Hollanders having behaved
themselves bravely in four sea Engagements,
and the Parliament of England being become very jealous
of France, a separate Peace, was by the Mediation
of spain, concluded betwixt Holland and England. 
The Emperour and spain having then declared for Holland,
the French King took his Garrisons out of all the
conquered Places, having first exacted from them
great Contributions, except Naerden and Grave,
which were retaken by force. Thus the Hollanders got
all their places again except Maestricht; Rhinebergh
which belonged to the Elector of Collen being restored
to him, and the Country of Cleves to the Elector of
Brandenburgh. This War also restored the Prince of
Orange to the same Dignity, and that under better

Conditions than they had been in the possession of his
Ancestors. For the Common People, which already
favoured the House of Orange, being put quite into a
Consternation by the prodigious success of the French,
and being persuaded, that this Misfortune was occasioned
by the Treachery of some who sat at the Helm,
and that no body but the Prince could restore the decaied
state, did raise Tumults in most Cities, which
the Prince was forced to appease, by deposing the former
Magistrates, and putting in their room such as he
knew were favourers of himself. In one of these Tumults
Cornelius and John du Witt,
         The Du Witts murthered. two Brothers, were
miserably murthered by the Rabble in the Hague;
though a great many are of Opinion, That especially
the last of these, who had so long sat at the Helm,
had better deserved of his native Country. Tho the
Prince had been not a little instrumental in appeasing
the Commotions, whereby Holland was put in a condition
to recover it self, yet he was not so successfull in
his War against France: For he received a considerable
loss near seneffe,
         1674. he was repulsed before Maestricht,
and endeavouring to relieve st. 1676. 
         Omer, he was
defeated by the French;
         1677. and the Dutch Fleet which
was sent to the Relief of sicily had no great success. 
At last their Fear, that through long War their
Liberty might be endangered by the Prince, influenced
them to make a separate Peace with France,
by virtue of which Maestricht was restored to the
Hollanders. 
        §. The Constitution. 19. The seven Provinces of the Ʋnited Netherlands
are filled with a prodigious number of People,
there being some, who have computed, that in the
Province of Holland, the Number amounts to two
millions and 500000. And unto this vast Number of
People is to be attributed their Industry, increase of
Trade and great Riches; for in a Country which is
not the most fruitfull, and where every thing is very
dear, they must else of necessity perish by Famine:
But most of the Inhabitants were transplanted thither
out of other Countries; out of France during the times

of the Civil Commotions; out of England under
the Reign of Queen Mary; out of Germany during
those long Wars there; but chiefly, out of the other
Provinces of the Netherlands, at the time of their revolting
from spain. These strangers were invited into
this Country by its convenient situation, the Liberty
of Religion and the Government; by its extraordinary
Constitutions and Conveniencies for Trade
and Correspondency in all Parts; and at last, by the
great Reputation which the states have gained abroad,
by their wise Management at home, and success of
their Arms abroad. And because every body, who
either brings some Means along with him, or has
learned something to maintain himself withall, finds a
good Reception in Holland; even those who are prosecuted
in other places find a certain Refuge in this
Country. Their Genius. The Netherlanders are commonly very
open-hearted, down-right and honest, very free in
Words and Conversation, not easily to be moved or
stirred up; but if once made soundly angry, not easily
to be appeased. If you Converse with them without
Haughtiness and with Discretion, so as to accommodate
your self a little to their Inclinations, you may
do with them what you please. Charles V. used to
say of them, That there was not a Nation under the
sun, that did detest more the Name of slavery, and yet
if you did manage them Mildly and with Discretion,
did bear it more patiently. But the Rabble here is very
bad, it being a common Custom to speak ill and
despicably of their Magistrates, as often as things do
not answer Expectation. The Hollanders are very
unfit for Land-service, and the Dutch Horse-men are
strange Creatures, yet those who live in Gueldres, and
upon the Borders of Westphalia, are tolerably good. 
But at sea they have done such Exploits that they
may be compared with any Nation in the World. 
And the Zealanders are esteemed more Hardy and Venturous
than the Hollanders. They are also generally
very parsimonious, not much addicted to the Belly,
it being not the Custom here to spend their yearly Income,
but to save every Year an overplus. This saving

way of living upholds their Credit, and enables them
to bear such heavy Taxes without being ruined by
them. They are very fit for all sorts of Manufactury,
and very much addicted to Commerce, not refusing to
undergo any Labour or Danger, where something is
to be got, and those that understand Trade deal very
easily with them. They are very punctual in every
respect, pondering and ordering a thing very well before
they begin it. And there is scarce any Nation in
the World so fit for Trade as the Dutch, this being very
praise-worthy in them, that they always choose rather
to get somewhat by their own Industry, than by
Violence or Fraud. But especially, the greatest Liberty
which they enjoy, is a great Encouragement for
Trade. The chiefest Vice among them is Covetousness,
which however is not so pernicious among them,
because it produces in them Industry and good Husbandry. 
There is a great many who have been amazed
at the great Conduct which has appeared in the management
of their Affairs, notwithstanding that the
Hollanders in general are rarely of extraordinary Wit
or Merits: some alledge this for a Reason, That a
cold Temper and Moderation of Passions are the fundamental
Qualifications of such as intend to manage
state Affairs. §. The Nature of 〈◊〉 Country. 20. The seven Ʋnited Provinces are not very
large in Extent, they being to be reckoned but for
one Corner of Germany; but they are filled up with
so considerable a Number of beautifull, large and populous
Cities, that no other place of the same bigness
is to be compared to it. Besides the seven Provinces,
they are possessed of some Cities in Flanders and Brabant,
viz. Hulst, sluce, Ardenburgh, Bois le Duc,
Maestricht, Breda, Bergen op Zoom, Grave, and some
others. They also keep a Garrison in Embden, thereby
to secure the River of Embs. The Country in general
is more fit for Pasture than Tilling, it producing
scarce so much Corn as is sufficient for the fifth part
of its Inhabitants. But this want is made up by the
Industry of the Inhabitants, and the great conveniency

of so many Rivers and the seas, fit for Fishing
and Navigation. The Herring Fishery and that of Codds
brings in vast Riches to them; and some English have
computed, That the Hollanders sell every Year 79200
Lasts (which makes 138400 Tuns) of Herrings,
which amount to the value of 1372000l. not including
what is transported into spain, Italy and France,
and what is consumed at home. Of their shipping and Commerce. But their shipping
and Commerce is of much greater Advantage to
them, which does flourish there to that degree, that
some are of Opinion, That in Holland are more ships
than in all other parts of Europe. Besides, Holland's
situation in the midst of Europe makes it very fit for
Trade, so that it sends its ships with great Conveniency
into the East and Western seas; and though the
Commodiousness of those vast Rivers of the Rhine,
Meuse, Elbe, Weser, and Embs, draw the Commodities
out of Germany, and in exchange for these vends
its Manufacturies there: For Holland has in regard,
especially of the Rhine and the Meuse, a great Advantage
in its Trade before England, tho' this on the other
hand, has better Harbours and a deeper Coast:
And because Holland is at the latter end of the Year
commonly overflown with Waters, which makes the
Air very thick and foggy, Nature has been kind to
this Country, in that about that time the Wind blows
much Easterly, which disperses the Vapours, refreshes
the Air, and renders it wholsome; but from hence it
is that their Harbours are often shut up with Ice for
three Months together, whereas they are always open
in England. The Hollanders trade almost into every
Corner of the World, they having been very carefull
to erect Fortresses and Colonies in far distant Countries. 
But the East-India Company,East-India Company. 
          especially, has
vastly encreased her Trade and Riches; for this Company
has extended her Trade from Basora, which is
situated near the great Bay of Persia, at the very
Mouth of the River Tigris, all along a prodigious
Tract of rich Ground near the sea side as far as to the
utmost parts of Japan; she stands there in Confederacy
with many Kings, and with many of them has

made Treaties of Monopolies, and is possessed of a great
many strong Holds in those parts. The Capital City
there is Batavia, in Java Major, where the Governour
General keeps a Court like a King, under whose
Jurisdiction are the other places. The Company is
sovereign Mistress over all these Countries, the chiefest
of which are the Isles of Molucca and Banda, Amboina,
Malacca, the Coast of the Island of Zeilon, Patiacatta,
Musulapatan, Negapatan upon the Coast
of Cormandel, Cochin, Cananor and Cranganor upon
the Coast of Malabar, and several more; whether
they have a free Trade in the East-Indies with China,
I cannot affirm, tho' it is certain that the Chineses
drive a great Trade with them in Batavia; but in Japan
they have the whole Trade alone, no Portuguese
being permitted to come there. This Company is
able to set out a Fleet of betwixt 40 and 50 Capital
ships, and to raise an Army of 30000 Men. The first
Funds of this Company did amount to sixty Tuns of
Gold, which in the space of six Years, deducting all
the Charges and Dividends made to the Owners, was
encreased to three hundred Tuns of Gold. The
Funds of the West-Indi•
          Company was of fourscore
Tuns of Gold,The West-India Company. 
          and flour•shed extreamly at the beginning,
but ruined it self by making too great Dividends,
and not keeping a Fund sufficient for the carrying on
of the War against spain. Besides, those concerned in
this Company were more eager after Conquests than
Trade, and when Brasile revolted they received a capital
blow: Yet they are possessed in Gumea, of the
Castle de Mina; and if I am not mistaken of Loanda
in Angola, and some other places, as also some of the
Caribby Islands, and of New Holland, in the Northern
parts of America. They have also lately begun to
erect some Colonies in Guiana, and on the great River
of Orenoque. some of the most curious have observed,
that a great many things concurr in Holland for the
promoting of Trade, which are not to be met withall
all at once in any other Country: As for example,
the great quantity of People, the Conveniency and security
of the Country, the small Interest which is paid

for Money, which shews the great superfluity of ready
Money; the severity used against Thieves, Cheats,
and Banquerooteers; the Bank of Amsterdam, great
number of Convoys, and moderate Customs, that they
are so exact and regular in their way of Trading, that
the Magistrates are generally Merchants, or at least,
such as have an Interest in Commerce; That they are
Masters in the East-Indies, and that by reason of the
Frugality and Industry of the Inhabitants, far more
Commodities are exported than imported. And it is
observable, that tho' the Hollanders are Masters of the
spice in the Indies, yet they use them least of all themselves. 
They have also the greatest share in the silktrade
in Persia, and yet they cloath themselves in
Woollen Cloath, generally speaking. Nay, they sell
their fine Cloaths abroad, and send for courser out of
England for their own use. They sell their delicious
Butter, and send for other out of the North of England
and Ireland for their use. French Wines and
Brandies are the chiefest Commodities which are consumed
here, yet even when they make a Debauch,
they are not overlavishing. §. strength and Weakness of this Commonwealth. 21. From what has been said, it is manifest that
the strength of this commonwealth is founded upon
Trade and its Naval Force, which is absolutely necessary
to maintain the former; nor is there any Country
so stocked with good seamen, for the setting out of a
great Fleet. But on the Land-side, where the Country
cannot be under Water, it is not near so strong. For
tho' they do not want Money to raise an Army of Foreigners,
yet is it not always adviseable, for a commonwealth
to rely only upon such as have no other
tye but their Pay, since they may easily prove unfaithfull,
or else, mis-led by the General, assist him in
over-turning the Liberty of the state. And it has been
in regard of this that some have advised, that the
Provinces of Holland and Zealand should separate
themselves from the rest, and only endeavour to
strengthen themselves betwixt the Meuse, the Rhine,
and south-sea; and in case of Necessity, by opening of

their sluces, put the Country under-water; but for
the rest, only endeavour to strengthen themselves at
sea: But to examine this Proposition, is not now my
business. There are several Inconveniences that proceed
from the very Form of the Government of this
state. For, to speak properly, these seven Provinces
do not make up one entire commonwealth, but
there are seven Common wealths,Form of Government. which by the Union
at Ʋtrecht are joined into one Confederacy; they
have their Deputies constantly residing at the Hague,
whose business it is to take care of such Affairs as concern
the whole Union; and if any thing of moment
is to be decreed, they send to the several Provinces,
and according to the Approbation of these they make
their Decrees: these Deputies are called the states-General. 
Nay, it seems that each Province is rather a
Confederacy, than one City or commonwealth, because
the several Members of each Province do treat
with one another like Confederates, and not like one
Body, where one is superiour to the other, or the
majority of Votes determines a business. For even in
the Provincial Assemblies a great many things cannot
be determined by the Plurality of Votes, but every
Member's consent is required. Which shows, that these
Provinces and Cities not united by so strong a Tye, as
those who are governed by one soveraign, except as
far as Necessity obliges them to keep together. And
the great Cities are filled with Rabble; which if once
put in motion, uses to make strange work among
them. It is therefore the great Care of the Magistrates,
that they are kept in constant Employment to get
Bread, for Famine would quickly be the occasion of
great Tumults here. There is also a Jealousie betwixt
Holland and the other Provinces; the latter pretending
to some Prerogative, as being the most Powerfull, and
contributing most to the Publick; whereas the others
are for maintaining their Liberty and Equality. All
the rest of the Cities are especially jealous of Amsterdam,
because this City draws abundance of Trade from
the rest, and puts them in apprehension, as if she were
ambitious to domineer over them. But the greatest

Irregularity happens in their Constitution, by means of
the Prince of Orange,
         Prince of Orange. 
          who having the Favour of the
Common people, of the Land-souldiers and the Clergy
(for the Clergy hate the Arminians, who being
of the Barnefelt Faction, are Enemies of the Prince)
seems to endanger their Liberty. Wherefore the chief
Men in the Cities, to whom belongs the Magistracy
there, possess their places in continual fear, except they
will be pliable to the Prince of Orange; Whose interest
is also inconsistent with that of the state, because no
Land way can be advantageous for Holland; whereas
in time of War, his Authority is much greater than
otherwise. And therefore according to this Form of
the Government, scarce a firm Peace can be established
at home. It may easily happen that the Prince may
aspire to be their soveraign. 1675. And when the Province
of Gueldres did offer to him the soveraignty, he did
give them to understand, That if all the rest were of
the same Opinion, they should have no occasion to
look for him behind the Wine-pipes, as the Jews did
for saul; yet the wiser sort are of opinion, that he
would reap no great benefit from this soveraignty,
since it would be scarce possible to keep so many great
Cities in Obedience against their Will. For Cittadels
and Garrisons would prove the Ruin of Trade, which
never flourishes where absolute Power controuls the
subject. Wherefore it seems more adviseable for the
Prince to be satisfied with what Power he has, it being
certain, that if he knows how to manage the Humour
of the People, he is almost able to do what he
pleases. Whether it is their advantage to have a soveraignty. It has been a great Dispute, whether it be
for the advantage of these Netherlands, to have a Governour
General. Those who are for the Affirmative,
alledge, That this Country having been from ancient
Time under the Jurisdiction of a limited soveraignty,
has been used to that Form of Government; That it
conduces to the outward splendour of the commonwealth,
and to uphold the Authority of the Magistrates
in the Cities; That thereby Factions and Tumults
are kept under and suppressed. That thereby
are prevented a great many Inconveniences in executing

any designs of moment, which were incident to
an Aristocratical and Democratical state; viz. slow
and divided Counsels in Consultations, delays in Executions,
and the divulging of secret Designs; all which
we will leave undetermined here. This is also to be
esteemed one of the Weaknesses of this commonwealth,
that so great a number of Inhabitants cannot
be maintained by the Product of the Land, but must
get their Bread from abroad, and by the help of Foreigners. 
Wherefore the certain Ruin of this commonwealth
is at hand,Other Defects of this commonwealth. when-ever its Trade and Navigation
should be stopt; which however is not altogether
impossible to happen. The difference of Religion
is commonly reckoned among the weaknesses of
a state. But some make this one of the main Pillars
of the flourishing Condition of Holland, because it
contributes greatly to the strength and Encrease of
this state. The Reformed Religion is here the Established
Religion, all the rest being only tolerated:
The Papists are connived at, but also they keep over
them a strict Eye, for fear the Priests, who all depend
on the Pope, should enter into a Correspondency with
spain. Yet it is rarely seen in Holland, that one subject
hates the other, or prosecutes him upon the score
of Religion. It has been the saying of some, that in
other Countries Religion doth more good, but in Holland
less harm. It is also very inconvenient for the
Inhabitants, that all sorts of Victuals are sold at so excessive
a Rate: The reason of which is, That the greatest
Revenues of Holland, are raised by way of Excise
upon these Commodities; and it is a common saying,
That before you can get a Dish of Fish ready dressed
upon your Table at Amsterdam, you have paid above
Thirty several Taxes for it. And notwithstanding all
these heavy Impositions, the state is much in debt. 
There are some also who pretend, that the Traffick of
the Dutch does grow less and less; for which they alledge
several Reasons; viz. That since the Peace concluded
at Munster, other Nations have also applied
themselves to Trade. That the Price of the East-India
Commodities does fall every Year, and yet the Charges

of the Company increases daily. For whereas formerly
five or six East-India ships coming home yearly,
were reckoned very considerable, now eighteen or
twenty do return; which so over-stocks them with
these Commodities, that they are obliged to lay them
up in their Ware-houses for a considerable time, before
they can vent them without Loss. They alledge allso,
that Corn has been of late years so abundant in
France, spain, Italy and England, that the Hollanders
have not sent much of it into these Parts, it being
their custom to fetch Corn from off the East-sea,
where they vent, in exchange of it, most or their
spices: That the great Addition of Fortifications and
sumptuous Buildings to the City of Amsterdam, have
taken up a great quantity of Ready-money, which
might have been better employed in way of Trade;
and that Luxury and Debauchery does encrease daily
in that City. But the Reason why the Hollanders had
such ill success at the beginning of this War, seems to
be, that by the great Eagerness of Gain and Trade,
their Martial Heat was almost extinguished; and that
after the Peace concluded at Munster, they being not
apprehensive of any Invasion by Land, they only applied
themselves to strengthen their Power at sea;
and having dismissed their best Officers, they had supplied
their place with their own Relations; whose
Motto was,1665. 
         Peace and a good Government. For at
the time of the War with England they had dismissed
the Old English Bands; and in the Year 1668, the
French Troops, both which were the flower of their
Armies, which of necessity must have been reduced
into a very ill condition, since the Prince of Orange
had no more concern with them. Besides this, they
thought themselves very secure, not imagining that
France would either dare, or be able to attempt a
Conquest over them, as long as they were sure, that
the Emperour and spain would side with them; neither
did they imagine that the English would join with
the French against them. And at last they hoped,
they would beat the English out of the sea, before
France should be able to take three or four Places. 

They relied upon the old Way of making of War,
when a whole Company was taken up with the Taking
of one Place, and when whole Books were composed
of the Taking of Groll, or the sar of Ghent. 
It is also believed, that some of the Hollanders were
not sorry, that they had no great success by Land,
hoping thereby to bring into discredit the Conduct, and
to diminish the Authority of the Prince, whom they
had been obliged to make their Captain-General against
their Will. §. The Neighbours of Holland. 
          22. As for the Neighbours of Holland, and
what it has to fear or to hope from them; it seems
that the English are the most dangerous Neighbours
to the Hollanders, they being the only Nation that
have been formidable to them hitherto, against their
Pretensions to the Dominion of the seas and Trade;
who are extreamly dissatisfied, that this new commonwealth,
which, when it was in a very tottering
condition, was strongly upheld by them, has now
been before-hand with them in the East-Indies, and
daily spoil their Markets almost every-where. For,
because an English-man is naturally proud,England. and loves
to live well; whereas a Hollander minds nothing so
much as his Gain, being satisfied with an indifferent
share, nor spends any thing idly; a Hollander can sell
cheaper than an English-man, and strangers will always
rather deal with the first than the last. It is
therefore in all probability the chief Interest of Holland,
not to irritate England, and rather to allow
them some Ceremonial Prerogatives at sea, such as
striking, and the like; but withall to strengthen their
Power at sea, that, in case England should really contest
with them for the Trade and Fishing, it may be
able to make head against them. The Hollanders must
also, as much as is possible, endeavour to encourage
the same sort of Manufacture, as is in England, and
either to make these Commodities better, or at least
to sell them cheaper, thereby to get the advantage
from them. The Hollanders ought to stand in great
fear of France on the Land-side,France. especially since that

King is their great Enemy, having opposed for a considerable
time all their Designs. It is therefore very
necessary to be in a good posture on the Land-side,
and to keep fair with the Princes of Germany, who
else would permit the French to march through
their Territories, or else perhaps join with him. 
They must endeavour the Preservation of the spanish
Netherlands, which they ought to consider as
their Frontiers, and whereby spain is obliged always
to side with Holland against France. They
must take care to be provided with good Officers,
and to put the Province of Holland into a better
Posture of Defence on the side of Gueldres. It is
not easie to be supposed, that England and France
will join again against Holland, which may be prevented
by the Hollanders. It is also the Interest of
Holland to take care, that the Naval strength of
France do not increase too much, and to prevent,
as much as in them lies, that they do not settle a
Trade in the East-Indies. And because France draws
the Riches of all Europe to it self by its Manufacturies,
the Hollanders must try to imitate them, and
furnish other Nations with the like. spain. From spain,
Holland need fear nothing either by sea or Land,
since that time, that this Kingdom has lost all its
labour against them. Nay, it is their Common Interest
now that they cultivate a mutual good Understanding,
to stop the Progresses of the French
in the Netherlands: And the spaniards have scarce
any thing left them, from which the Dutch could
have any prospect of Benefit, they being not in a
Capacity to conquer or to maintain the West-Indies. 
And though the Hollanders may be very troublesome
to the spanish silver Fleets, yet the spanish
Privateers may also do them considerable mischief. 
Portugal has no Pretensions against Holland,
         Portugal. and it
ought most to stand in fear of the Hollanders, because
these would be glad of an opportunity to take
from the Portuguese Brosile, and what they have left
in the East-Indies, which however they would not
so easily be able to execute; because the Hollanders
         
are obliged to fetch their Bread out of the East-sea;
they have always taken care that neither of the
Northern Kings should be Master alone of the Eastsea;
         The Northern Crowns. 
which Balance is the easier kept now, since the
sound is divided betwixt sweden and Denmark. And
it is notorious enough what Game they have plaied
with these two Kings. For the rest, it is the general
Interest of Holland, to keep fair with all other
Princes, thereby to maintain a free Commerce everywhere. 
And in these Places where they cannot Trade
alone, it is the Interest of the Hollanders either by
goodness or cheapness of their Commodities, and an
easie Deportment to endeavour to draw the chief
Benefit of Trade to themselves. For this is the easier
and less odious Way to heap up Riches, than if
they should attempt publickly to mix the Foreign
Trade of all other Nations; since it would prove
impossible for them alone to maintain a general
Monopoly. CHAP. VII. Of the sWITZERs. §. 1. First Original of this Common
           •ealt•. THese Countries which are possessed now by the
switzers belonged formerly to the German Empire;
but that they were united in one Commonwealth
was occasioned thus; the three small Counties of Ʋry,
switz, and Ʋnder-Walden, which commonly are called
the three Forest Towns, enjoied very antient Privileges,
which they pretended to have been granted them by
the Emperor Lewis, surnamed the Pious, yet so, that
the Emperor used to send thither an Imperial Judge
or Vicar, who had the supreme Jurisdiction in criminal
Affairs. There were also some Monasteries in those
Countries which, tho they enjoied particular Privileges,
yet did they not interfere with their Liberty of the
People. But there lived a great many Noblemen
among them also, who by degrees getting the ascendant
over the Common People, did oppress their Liberty,
especially during the diffe•ences which were betwixt
the Emperors and the Popes, when the Nobility used
to side with the Popes, but the Commonalty with the
Emperor. These divisions betwixt the Nobility and the
People grew very high at the time of the great Interregnum,
which happened after the death of the Emperor
Frederick the second, which breaking out into an
open War, the whole Nobility was driven out of
the Counrry; but by the Emperor Rodolfus's Authority,
a reconciliation having been made betwixt them,
the Nobles were restored to their Estates. Thus these
Countries did enjoy their former Liberty, till the Reign
of Albert I. who having conceived a hatred against
them, because they had sided with his Rival Adolph
of Nassaw, was very desirous to annex them to his Hereditary
Countries; the Monasteries therefore, and a great
many of the Nobility, having, upon his desire, submitted
themselves to the Jurisdiction of the House of Austria:
         
The same was also proposed to the three abovementioned
places, who refusing his proposition, he set
over them Imperial Judges or Vicars, who, contrary to
the antient Custom, began to reside in strong Castles,
and having first tried by perswasions to bring them over
to the House of Austria, afterwards, when they found
their labour lost that way, grew very burthensom to
the People by their oppressions; neither were the Petitions
made against them by the Commonalty in any
ways regarded by the Emperor; nay the Judge of
Ʋnder-Walden, who's name was Geisler, was become
so extravagant, that he set his Hat upon a Pole in the
Market-Place of Altorf, commanding that every body
should pay the same respect to his Hat as to himself;
thereby to make a tryal of their Obedience. And among
others one William Tell having often passed by
without paying his Respect, he forced him to shoot
with an Arrow through an Apple, which was pla•ed
upon his own sons Head; but this man whilst he was
carrying to prison, making his escape, stirred up the
hatred of the People against the Judges. § 2. Th• first Ʋ
           n•on of he switz
          There were at that time three Men of great
Authority among them, viz. Werner stouffacher, born in
switz, Walter Furst born in Ʋry, and Arnold of Melchtale
born in Ʋnder-Walden: These entred into an Association,
whereby it was agreed among them, to rid
themselves of this Tyranny, and to restore their antient
Liberty. A great many more having entred afterwards
into this Association an agreement was made betwixt
them; that in the year 1308. on the first day of January,
they would surprize these Judges in their strong
Castles, and drive them out of the Country. This
Confederacy was made in the year 1307. on the 17. of
October; and having afterwards been put in execution
in the abovementioned year, on the first day of January,
these three places entred into a Confederacy for ten
years for the mutual Defence of their antient Liberties. 
In the year 1315. Leopald Arch-Duke of Austria, son
of Albert I. marched with an Army of 20000 Men
to force them to Obedience; against whom they marched
out with 1300 men, and whilst the Austrian Forces were

marching betwixt the Lane and inaccessible mountains,
some of the switzers by rowling down upon them, and
throwing great heaps of stones among them, put the Enemy
in confusion, whilst the rest fell upon them and
entirely defeated them near Morgarten. Then these
three places renewed their Confederacy,The B•••el near Morgarten. 
          and having
confirmed it by solemn Oaths, they agreed it should
continue for ever. This was done at Brun, in the
year 1320. on the 7th. of December. And this is the
first beginning of that Commonwealth, whose Confederates
used to call themselves Edytsgenossen (which signifies
Allied by Oath) but strangers call them in general
switzers, from that one place called switz. 
        § 3. To fi•st design of this Confederacy. Nevertheless the first intention of this Confederacy
was not to separate themselves from the German
Empire, but only to maintain their antient Privileges;
tho by degrees they began to Administer their own
Affairs at home without sending their Deputies to the
Dyets of the Empire: and the switzers were not till in
the year 1648. viz in the Westphalian Peace declared
quite Independent from the Roman Empire; for the
Emperor Lewis IV. had confirmed the former Confederacy,
and in 1320. had sent them a new Imperial Vicar
or Judge, unto whom, after having received new assurances
to be maintained in their Privileges, they did
Homage, in the name of the Emperor. But the following
Emperors gave them full power to choose Judges
among themselves, granting them the supreme Jurisdiction
both in Civil and Criminal Affairs. In the year
1332. Lucern, and in the year 1351. Zurick entred
into this Confederacy. Lucern was formerly under the
Jurisdiction of the House of Austria. Zurick, which
is the chiefest of the Confederacy, was formerly a free
Imperial City. Immediately after Glaris, and in the
year 1352. Zug and Bern were United with the former. 
The switzers after this time had great Wars
with the House of Austria, and in 1386 slew Leopold
Arch-Duke of Austria,
         Battel near sempach▪
           
          with a great many▪ Nobles, in
the battel near sempach. In the year 1444. the switzers
did give another proof of their Valour; for the
Dauphin of France, afterward, called Lewis XI. marching

with a great Army to disturb the Council then
held at Basil, was attacked by 1900 switzers with such
fury, that tho they all fell in the enterprize, yet did
they strike such a terror into the French, that they
quickly retreated homewards. § 4. Wars wi•h Charles Duk• of Burgundy. 
          In the year 1476 the switzers were engaged in a
war against Charles Duke of Burgundy, who was stirred up
by Lewis XI. who was for setting the Duke at work. 
Against him Rene Duke of Lorain, and the Bishops of
strasburgh, and Basil, made an Alliance with the switzers:
The Emperor Frederick III. also being desirous to
revenge the quarrel of his House, commanded them to
fall upon the Duke of Burgundy, who then was an Enemy
of the Empire. And having afterwards made
a Peace with the Duke without including the switzers,
he hoped they would be severely chastized by this brave
Prince; but things happened quite contrary to his expectation;
for the switzers defeated the Duke in three
great Battels; the first near Granson, afterwards near
Murten, where the Duke had an Army of one hundred
thousand Men, and at last near Nancy in Lorain, where
the Duke himself was killed. By these Victories the
switzers gained great Reputation. In the year 1481. 
Fribourgh and solothurn; in the year 1501. Basil
and shafshausen, and last of all Appen-Zell were united
with this Confederacy. The whole body then of
the swisse Confederacy is composed of 13 Commonwealths,
which they call Places; but the Italians and
French call them Cantons;
         Their All•es among these Zuric, Bern,
Lucern, Zug, Basil, Fribourgh, selothum, and shafshausen,
are Cities; Ʋry, switz, Ʋnderwalden, Glariss and
Appen-Zell, are Countries, where are a good number of
Towns and Villages to be met withal. The switzers
have also some other Confederates, viz. the Abby and
City of s. Gall, the Grisons, the Vallesins, the Cities of
Rotweil, Munthusen, Bienne, the Biel, Geneva, and
Newburgh on the Lake: There are also among them
several Cities and some Counties, which are either
subject to the whole Confederacy or to some particular
Commonwealths. 
§ 5. some o•her Wars of th• 
           switzers
          The switzers were also obliged to fight against
the Emperor Maximilian I. for their Liberty; he having
stirred up the swabian League against them,1499. hoping
by this way to chastise them. But the switzers for the
most part got the better of their Enemies, till through
the mediation of Lewis Duke of Milan a peace was
made betwixt them. Not to relate here some intestine
Commotions among them, scarce worth mentioning,
they have done great Actions abroad, under
the Conduct of other Nations, and more especially
under the French: For Lewis XI. having, whilst he
was Dauphin, sufficiently tryed their Valour in the engagement
near Basil, sought by all ways after he was
King, to make use of the switz in his Wars; wherefore
he allowed them a certain yearly Pension: And
his son Charles VIII. made use of the switzers with
good success in his Expedition against Naples; for the
Italians, when they saw the switzers make such a prodigious
havock among them by the help of their BattelAxes
and large Back-swords; they were so surprized
at it, that they counted the former Wars but like
Childrens play in comparison of this, and looked upon
the switzers more like some Monsters than soldiers. 
Lewis XII. also emploied the switzers in his service in
his Italian Wars, tho they lost great part of their Reputation
there. For these switzers which were listed
in the service of Lewis Menis Duke of Milan, refusing
to fight against their Countrymen that were in the
French Army, thereby betraied this Prince into the
hands of the French. 
        § 6. But in the year 1510. Th•ir Wars with France
          the switzers left the
French service; for the time of agreement with France
being expired, they demanded a larger Pension, and
which Lewis XII. refused to pay them, thinking it unbecoming
the grandeur of a King to be imposed upon
by these Highland Peasants (as he used to call them)
he having therefore dismissed them, took into his
service some of the Grisons and Germans in their stead. 
But this proved very disadvantageous to France; for they
listed themselves under Pope Julius II. and did great
service against France. They attacked the French who

were much more numerous,1513. with such fury, near Novara,
that after a bloody Fight they not only routed
them, but also quite beat them out of Italy. Afterwards
they fell into Burgundy and besieged the City
of Dijon, where the Duke of Tremoville was obliged
to make a very dishonorable agreement with them,
and was glad to send them home with fair promises
of great sums of Money; and if he had not stoped
their progress they would certainly have put France
into the utmost danger, the King of England being at
the same time faln into France on the other side. The
switzers attacked Francis I. 1515 in his Camp near Marignano;
the fight lasted two days, and after a great deal
of bloodshed on both sides the switzers retired in good
order. Wherefore Francis I. in the year next following
gained their Friendship by a great sum of Money,
whose example the succeeding Kings have followed
ever since. Their antient Reputation is much diminished
of late years, partly because they are not altogether
so furious now, partly because other Nations have
found out a way to bring their Infantry into a better
condition. And besides this, those great Back-swords
which the switz used to handle with so much dexterity
by the extraordinary strength of their Arms, are quite
out of use in Europe. 
        § 7. As to the qualifications of these Countries,The 〈◊〉 of the soil. 
which are Inhabited by the switzers, they are very different;
for in the mountainous parts scarce any thing
else but Pasture Grounds are to be met withal; but
tho the Valley and flat Country produce Corn
and Wine in considerable quantities, yet among so vast
a number of Inhabitants there appears no great plenty
here, since Foreign Commodities cannot be imported
without great difficulty, and what is deficient in the
native soil, is not repaired by Traffick and Manufactories. 
'Tis therefore accounted a common calamity among
the switzers if once in some years the Plague does
not come among them, to rid them of so many superfluous
Mouths. Yet they enjoy this benefit by the situation
of their Country, that, by reason of the high
Mountains and narrow Passages, it is almost inaccessible,

especially on the Italian side, and in the midst of
the Country; for some of the outward parts are of a
very easie aocess. § 8. The Gen•ns of this N•
           tion. The switzers pretend to be downright honest
and true to their word; and indeed, they are generally
simple and Plain-Dealing, without any great Cunning
or By-Designs; but they are couragious and soon
provoked to wrath. They are steadfast in their Resolutions,
from whence they dont easily recede; their
valour, constancy, talness and strength of Body, has so
recommended them to a great many Princes, that they
choose their Guards among them; and the King of France
maintains a considerable number of switz Foot souldiers. 
They are very forward to fight, but not to undergo
any other hardship or labour; they expect to
have duely their pay, if that fail, they return home
as fast as they can; from whence comes the Proverb,
No Money no swisse. They do not love to bear hunger
or hardship in other Countries, because they have enough
of that at home. It is one of the Articles of Agreement
made with France, that that Crown shall
never have less than 6000 at a time in pay, and that
these are not to be separated: That in case these Articles
should not be performed, they may be in capacity
to assist one another: They also never will be imploied
in any sea service. § 9. Their strength and weakness The main strength of this Confederate Commonwealth
consists in the number of its Inhabitants:
For in the City of Bern, which has the greatest Territories,
pretends alone to be able to send into the
Field 100000 fighting Men. And it is not to be
questioned, but that, if they had been ambitious of
making Conquests, at that time when their Glory
was at the highest pitch, or had not wanted Conduct,
they might easily have brought under their subjection
the Franche Comte, and a great part of Lombardy;
but the reason why they did not aim at Conquests
was partly their Inclination, which did not prompt
them to encroach upon their Neighbou•s; partly the
constitution of their Government, which seems to be

unfit for great and suddain Enterprises: For each Canton
by itself considered is a Democracy, the highest
Power being lodged in the Guildes; and it is certain,
that such as are of little Understanding and Experience,
are always very positive in their opinions, and suspicious
of all mankind. And the whole Confederacy is altogether
adapted for their common Defence, and for the
maintaining of a firm Union betwixt themselves. The
difference of Religion is also a main obstacle among
them, some of them being Roman Catholicks, but
most Protestants, and both Parties great Zealots in
their Religion: Wherefore it seems a hard task to
make them all truly unanimous, except forced by the
necessity of a common Danger. And in this Democratical
Government it is not to be supposed, that one
man can have sufficient Authority to sway the rest,
and to stir them up to any great and sudden Enterprise. 
And this slowness of their publick Counsels is such a
check upon their natural Valour at home, that they
can employ it no better than to sell it for a little money
to other Nations. § 10. Their neighbours. This is the very reason why the switzers
are the best Neighbours in the World; as being never
to be feared, and always ready to assist you in case
of necessity, if you pay them for it. On the other
hand, they need not stand in great fear of their Neighbours. 
The states of Italy are not in a capacity to do
them any harm, and Germany is not willing to hurt
them. If the House of Austria should attack them,
they are able to defend themselves, and besides this,
they may in such a case be sure to be backed by
France. France alone seems to be their most dangerous
Neighbour; and it has been the wonder of many, why
the switzers rely altogether upon the French Alliance
and Promises, and do not in the least endeavour to
secure their Country against the growing Power of
France; and that in the last war they left the Franche
Comtè to the mercy of the French, which opens the
Passage into their Country, and enables the French to
levy souldiers on their Frontiers at pleasure. It seems
therefore to be the present Interest of switzerland, not

to imitate the French, and nevertheless to take care,
that they do not make themselves Masters of their
Frontier Places, viz. of Geneva, Newburgh on the Lake,
the Four Forest Towns, and Constance. That they do
not send too great a number of their Men into the
French service, whereby they may exhaust their own
stock of souldiers; and that such as are sent into the
French service, may be engaged not to be forgetful of
their Duty to their native Country, so as to be ready
to return home in case of necessity. On the other hand,
France seems to have no great reason to attack the
switzers, as long as they are quiet and do not pretend
to oppose the French Designs; it being evident, that
if France had once obtained its aim, the switzers would
be obliged to submit themselves. And it seems at this
time more Advantageous for the French to make use of
the switzers as their Allies, than by conquering them,
to make them refractory subjects, who, by reason of
their natural stubborness, must be bridled by strong
Garisons, which would scarce be maintained out of
the Revenues of so poor a Country. CHAP. VIII. Of the GERMAN Empire. § 1. Te antient condition of Germany. 
          
         GErmany was not antiently one Commonwealth,
but divided into a great many
states, and independent of each other,
most of them being Democracies: And tho some of
them had their Kings, yet these had more Authority to
Advise than to Command. These several states were
at last united under the Government of the Francks:
The Kings of the Merovingean Family having undertaken
several Expeditions into Germany, did reduce several of
these states under their subjection: And Charles the
Great reduced all Germany under his Jurisdiction,Charles t•e Great. he
being at the same time Master of France, Italy, Rome,
and a part of spain; all which Provinces he committed
to the care of certain Governours, who were called
Graves or Marc-Graves. The saxons retained more of
their antient Liberty than the rest; wherefore the better
to keep this, then barbarous Nation in obedience,
he erected several Episcopal sees in saxony, hoping,
by the influence of the Christian Doctrine, to civilize
this barbarous People. Lewis the Pious. 
         Lewis, surnamed the Pious,
son of Charles the Great, had three sons, viz. Lotharius,
Lewis, and Charles, who divided the Empire of
the Francks among them. In this Division Lewis got
for his share all Germany, as far as it extends on this side
of the Rhine, and also some Countries on the other side
of that River, by reason of the Vineyards, as 'tis said,
which are on both sides. Lewis K. of German•. All which he was possessed
of as sovereign, without being in any ways dependent
on his elder Brother, much less the younger, who had
France for his share: And at that time Germany was
first made a Kingdom independent of any other. 
§ 2. Carolomannus, the son of this Lewis, did, after
the death of Charles the Bald, who was King of France,
and had born the Title of Roman Emperour, Conquer
Italy, and took upon him the Imperial Dignity, notwithstanding
that Lewis, son of Charles the Bald and King
of France, had, upon instigation of the Pope, assumed
the same Title. After him succeeded his younger Brother
Carolus Crassus,
         C. Crassus. who maintained both the Kingdom
of Italy and the Imperial Title. 8•7. But the great
Men in Germany having deposed the said Charles, they
made Arnolph, the son of the abovementioned Carolomannus,
King of Germany,
         894. who went into Italy and
took upon him the Title of Roman Emperour, for which
had contended for a good while Berengarius Duke
of Trioul,
         899. and Guido Duke of spoleto. But after
the death of Arnulph,
         Lewis the Child. his son Lewis, surnamed the
Child, obtained the Crown of Germany, under whose
Reign the Affairs of Germany were in so ill a condition,
that he had no leisure to look into those of Italy:
For Arnulph had called to his assistance the Hungarians
against Zwentepold, King of Bohemia and Moravia, who
had Rebelled against him, with whose assistance he reduced
Zwentepold to obedience; but the Hungarians,
who were at that time a most barbarous Nation, having
got a tast of Germany, made an inroad into that
Country, ravaging every where with an inhuman Cruelty. 
They also defeated Lewis near Augsburgh,
         9•5. obliging
him to pay them a yearly Tribute; notwithstanding
which, they ravaged and plundered wherever they
came. This overthrow was chiefly occasioned by the
Kings tender Age, and the Divisions of the great
Men among themselves, who aimed at nothing more
than to establish their own Authority. 9•1. After the
death of Lewis,
         Cunrad. 
         Cunrad, Duke of Franconia, was elected
King Germany, under whose Reign the Potent Dukes
of Lorain, swabia, Bavaria, and saxony, did prete•d
to maintain the sovereignty over their own Countries,
and a Hereditary Possession; which Cunrad was not
able to prevent; and because Henry Duke of saxony
was the most Potent, and Cunrad feared, that at last
he might quite withdraw himself from the German
         
Empire, he upon his Death-bed advised the rest of the
Princes of Germany to make him their King, which was
done accordingly. And thus the Empire was transferred
from the Carolingian Family to the saxons. 
        § 3. Henry the Faulconer. 
         Henry surnamed the Birdcatcher, did bridle the
Fury of the Hungarians: For they having made a great
inroad into Germany, and demanded the Yearly Tribute
from him, he sent them a Mungeril-Dog, and afterwards
Defeated them in a bloody Battle near Merseburgh,
where he slew 80000 of them. Under the
Reign of this King, the greatest part of the Cities
which are situated on the sides of the Rhine. were either
Built, or else Fortified with Walls. This Henry,
also did Conquer the serbes and Wendes, a sarmatick
or sclavonian Nation, who being possessed of a large
Tract of Land in Germany, on the River Elbe, he drove
out of Misnia, Lusatia and the Marquisate of Brandenburgh. 
After he had re-established the Affairs of Germany,
he died in the Year 936. Otto the Great. After him succeeded
his son Otto, surnamed the Great, who at first was
engaged in heavy Civil Wars against several Princes,
but especially against those who pretended to be of the
Race of Charles the Great, and were extremely dissatisfied
that the Royal Dignity was transferred to the
saxons. He was also very Fortunate in his Wars against
the Danes. To the Hungarians, who ventured to
make another Incursion into Germany, he gave a capital
overthrow near Augsburgh, since which time, they
never have dared to shew themselves in Germany. In
Italy there had been great Confusions for a long time, the
soveraignty having been usurped sometimes by one,
sometimes by another, till at last▪ 
         Otto being called thither,
possessed himself both of the Kingdom of Italy and
the Imperial Dignity, it having been then agreed, that
both the Imperial and Royal Dignity of Italy, should be
inseparably annexed, without any further Election, to
the Royal Dignity of Germany, and that no Pope should
be chosen without the Approbation of the King of the
Germans,
         •62. and Otto was Crowned at Rome: tho' this
Conquest has proved not very beneficial to Germany,
the succeeding Popes having made it their Business to

raise continual Disturbances, which was not easy to
be prevented, because these Places were not kept in
awe by strong Castles or Garisons. Wherefore as often
as the Popes were pleased to raise new Commotions,
the Germans were obliged to send great Armies thither,
which continual Alarms consumed great quantities
of Men and Money: In lieu of which, their
Kings had scarce any Revenues out of Italy, except
that they had Free Quarters and Entertainment given
them during their stay there. This Otto died in the
Year 974 leaving for his successour his son Otto II. Otto II. 
who also at first met with great Disturbances from some
of the Princes of Germany. Afterwards Lotharius King
of France would have made himself Master of Loraine,
and had very near surprised the Emperour at Aix la
Chapelle: But Otto marched with an Army through
Champaigne to the very Gates of Paris; but in his return
home received a considerable Loss. At last a
Peace was concluded at Rheims, by Vertue of which,
Loraine was left to the Emperour. He then undertook
an Expedition into Italy against the Greeks, who had
made themselves Masters of that Country; these he
overthrew at first, but received afterwards a grand Defeat,
because the Romans and those of Benevento immediatly
turned their Backs; he himself fell into the
Hands of the Enemy, but found means to make his
Escape from them, and revenged himself against the former
for their Infidelity. He died not long after of Vexation. 
His son Otto III. Otto I▪
          did employ a great part
of his Reign in appeasing these Tumults, which were
raised in Rome by the Consul Crescentius, who aiming at
the sovereignty, was hanged for his pains by Order of
Otto, who was afterwards poysoned by the Widdow of
the said Crescentius with a pair of Gloves made up with
a certain sort of Poyson. 1001. 
         Otto having left no Children
behind him, the Crown was conferred upon Henry II. 
surnamed the Lame, Duke of Bavaria, who sprang from
the saxon Race; with whom Ecbart Landgrave of Hesse,
did contend for the Crown, but lost his Life in the
Quarrel. This Emperour was entangled in continual
Troubles in Italy, and chastised Boleslaus King of Poland,
         
Because he was a great Benefactor to the Clergy,
he was made a saint after his Death. § 4. 1024. 
         Henry II. having left no Children behind
him,Conrad II. the Princes elected Conrad sali Duke of Franconia,
Emperour in his room, which occasioned great Jealousie
in the saxons, and great Wars in Germany. This Emperour
met with great Disturbances both in Germany and
Italy, which were at last all composed. Radolf the last
King of Burgundy and Arus dying without Issue, left
him that Kingdom by his last Will, which he took Possession
of and united the same with Germany, having
forced Eudo the Earl of Champaigne who made a pretension
upon it,1034. to resign his Title. He was also very
Fortunate in his Wars against the Pole•
          and sclavonians,
and died in the Year 1035. Him succeeded his
son Henry,
         Henry III: surnamed the Black, who was continually
allarmed by the Hungarians and the Popes Intrigues,
against whom he maintained the Imperial Dignity with
great bravery. He died in the Year 1056. His son
Henry IV. Henry IV. his Reign was very long, but also very Troublesome
and Unfortunate. Among other Reasons, this
may be counted one of the Chiefest, that he being but
six Years of Age when his Father died, was left to
the Tuition of such as had no true Care of his Education;
and besides this, by selling the Church Benefices
without having any Regard to Deserts, had done considerable
Mischief to the Empire. Wherefore Henry
coming to his riper Years, and perceiving how the Ecclesiasticks
had got all the best Possessions of the Empire
into their Hands, he resolved to dispossess them again,
whereby he drew upon himself the hatred of the Clergy. 
The saxons were also his great Enemies, because he had
by Building up of some Fortresses endeavoured to restrain
their Insolencies; and tho' he often kept his Court
in saxony, yet he seldom preferred the saxons to any Offices. 
Most of the Princes were also dissatisfied
with him, because he rarely advised with them concerning
the publick state of Affairs, but either followed
the Advice of his Counsellors, who were most of them
Men of mean Birth, or else his own Head. These and

some other Reasons, set the saxons against him in an
open Rebellion, with whom he waged long and bloody
Wars,The Pope gives him great trouble till he vanquished them at last. But Pope
Hildebrand or Gregory VII. and his successours, did
raise a more dreadful storm against him; for the Popes
having long since been vexed to the Heart, that they
and the rest of the Clergy should be subject to the
Emperour, Hildebrand thought to have now met
with a fair Opportunity to set the Clergy at Liberty,
at a time when the Emperour was entangled
in a War with the saxons, and hated by most Princes
of the Empire. The Emperour had lived somewhat too
Free in his younger Years, and the Church Benefices having
been rather bestowed upon Favourites or such as
payed well for them, than such as deserved them, furnished
the Pope with a specious Pretence to make a Decree,
that it was not the Emperour's right to bestow
Bishopricks or other Church Benefices upon any Body,
but that it did belong to the Pope. The Emperour was
also summoned to appear at Rome, and to give an Account
concerning his Mis-behaviour, and in case of failure,
he was threatened with an Excommunication. On
the other Hand, the Emperour having declared the Pope
unworthy of his Office, would have deposed him. so
the Pope excommunicated the Emperour, discharging all
his subjects from their Allegiance due to him, which
proved of such Consequence in those Times, that all
his Authority fell to the Ground at once among most of
his subjects, whereby he was reduced to the greatest
Extremity. For most Princes assembled at Trebes, where
they deposed Henry: which sentence, however, was
so far mitigated afterwards, that the same should be
left to the Pope's decision. Henry therefore accompanied
by a few, was obliged to undertake a Journey in
the midst of the Winter into Italy, and being arrived at
Canu•io, was fain to stay three Days barefooted in a
coarse Woollen Habit in the outward Court, and in an
humble posture, to beg the Pope's Absolution, which
he at last granted him. But the Emperour received no great Advantage by it,
for the Italians were quite disgusted at this Demeanour
of his, which obliged the Emperour to make use of his

former Authority to reduce them to Obedience. In
the mean while the Princes of Germany by instigation
of the Pope, did elect Radolph Duke of swabia their
King; but the Bavarians, Franconians, and the Countries
next adjacent to the Rhine did remain in obedience
of the Emperour Henry. Thus a bloody War ensued,
wherein Radolph, and the saxons were vanquished in
two battels, and in the third he lost his right hand and
life. 1084. Then Henry called together an Assembly of the
Bishops, and having deposed Hildebrand, he caused another
to be chosen in his room: He also returned home
himself, and banished Hildebrand. But the saxons persisted
in their Rebellion against the Emperour, who was
again Excommunicated by the Pope, and having first
set up Herman Duke of Luxenburgh, and after his death,
Ecbert Marquess of saxony for their Kings,H•• s•n R•
           
           •els. but to no
purpose; they at last stirred up the Emperors son against
the Father. Against him the Emperour raised a great
Army, whom the son met, and in a deceitful manner
begged his pardon: Upon his perswasions the Father
having abandoned his Forces, and being upon his Journey
to the Dyet at Mayence, accompanied by a few,
this antient Prince was made a Prisoner and Deposed. 1106. 
He died soon after in great misery, who, in sixty two
battels which he had fought in his life time, generally
obtained the Victory. § 5. Henry V. As soon as Henry V. was made Emperour he
followed his Fathers example in maintaining the Imperial
Dignity: For as soon as he had settled the Affairs
of Germany, he marched with an Army towards Rome,
to renew the antient Right of the Emperours in nominating
of Bishops, and to be Crowned there. The
Pope, Paschal II. having got notice of the Emperours
design, raised a great Tumult at Rome, where the
Emperour was so close beset, that he was fain to fight in
Person for his safety: But the Emperour having got the
upper hand, made the Pope a Prisoner, and forced him
to give his consent to his demands. And this
their Agreement was confirmed by solemn Oaths and
Execrations; yet no sooner had the Emperour turned
his back, but the Pope having declared the Agreement

void, stirred up the saxons and the Bishops in Germany
against the Emperour. With these Henry was engaged
in a very tedious War; and perceiving at last, that
there was no other way left to compose these differences,
he granted the Popes demands, by renouncing his Right
to nominate Bishops,1122. at the Dyet held at Worms: which
resignation, as it greatly diminished the Emperour's Authority,
so on the other hand, it strengthened the power
of the Pope. 1125. This Emperour died without Issue. Him
succeeded Lotharius Duke of saxony,
         Lothar•us the sax•n. who had for a
Rival in the Empire Cunrad Duke of Franconia, whom
he quickly obliged to beg fair Quarters. This Emperour
having twice undertaken an Expedition into Italy, did
with great Glory restore Tranquility to that Country;
and, because he used to flatter the Pope, he was in
great esteem among the Clergy. He died in the year
1138. After his death Cunrad III. obtained the Imperial
Dignity, who was opposed by Henry Duke of
saxony and Bavaria, and his Brother Wulff, which occasioned
bloody Wars against him. But peace being restored
among them, he undertook an Expedition into
the Holy Land, where he underwent great Calamities;
for, tho he fought his way through the saracens, and
arrived safely at Jerusalem, yet after he had lost the greatest
part of his Army, without doing any thing of moment,
he was fain to return home. But whilst he was
busie in making preparations for another Expedition into
Italy he died, in the year 1252. § 6. Frederick I. Fredrick I. 
          succeeded him, who by the Italians
was surnamed Barbarossa, Duke of swabia, who
immediately at the beginning of his Reign, having setled
the affairs of Germany, did afterwards reduce Italy
under his obedience; which however was not of long
continuance; for the Milaneses quickly Rebelled, but
were severely chastised, their City having been laid level
with the ground. He was also in continual broils with
the Pope, against whom, and his Associates, he obtained
several Victories; yet being at last tired out with
so many wars, he made peace with him, especially
since his son Otto had been taken Prisoner by the Venetians. 
At the concluding of this Peace, 'tis said, that

Pope Alexander III. did set his foot upon the Emperours
neck, which by a great many is taken for a fable. This
Emperour was the last who maintained the Authority of
the German Emperours in Italy. Last of all he undertook
an Expedition into the Holy Land against saladin the
sultan of Egypt, who had taken the City of Jerusalem:
He beat the saracens several times, but endeavouring
to pass over a River in Cilicia on Horseback, or as some
will have it, intending to wash himself in the River, he
was drowned. 1189. And tho his son Frederic, after his Fathers
death, did take a great many Cities in syria, yet
the whole Expedition had a very bad end, the greatest
part of the Army, together with the Duke Frederick
having been consumed by the Plague,Henry VI. 
          or Famin. Frederick
was succeeded by his son Henry VI. in the Empire,
who, with his Lady Constantia, got the Kingdoms
of sicily, Calabria and Apuiia. This Emperour went
to Rome to receive the Crown from Pope Celestin, when
the Pope sitting in his Chair, and the Emperour on
his knees, put first the Crown upon his head, but immediatly
struck the same off again with his foot, intimating
thereby, as if it was in the power of the Popes
to give and to take away the Imperial Crown. He
died in the year 1198. having just then made great preparations
for an Expedition into the Holy Land, and
sent his Army before, he being ready to follow. § 7. Philip After the death of Henry VI. the Germans
were miserably divided among themselves; for Frederick
II. his son, being then but five years old, his Uncle
Philip pretended to have the Tuition of his Nephew,
and the Administration of the Empire, according to
the last Will of the deceased Emperour; but this being
opposed by the Pope, he perswaded some of the Princes
to elect Otto Duke of saxony. Germany was thus miserably
torn in pieces, most siding with Philip, the rest
with Otto. After a long war an agreement was made
betwixt them, that Otto should Marry the Daughter of
Philip, but lay down the Royal Title, till the death of
Philip, when the same was to be restored to him. Not
long after Philip was murthered at Bamberg by Otto the
Palatin of Wittelbach. After his death Otto obtained

the Imperial Dignity,1208. and having been Crowned at
Rome,
         Otto VI. 
          he resolved to reunite such places as were unjustly
possessed by the Popes to the Empire, which so exasperated
the Pope, that he Excommunicated him, exhorting
the Princes to elect another Emperour. Most
of them were for Frederick II. Frederick II. 
          son of Henry VI. which
made Otto to hasten into Germany; but having in vain
endeavoured to maintain himself in the Empire, he was
forced to surrender the Imperial Crown to Frederick
the second, King of sicily and Naples, and
Duke of suabia; who, after he had bestowed▪ a
considerable time in setling the Affairs of Germany,
went into Italy, where he was Crowned by the
Pope. In the year 1228. he undertook an Expedition
into the Holy Land, and retook Jerusalem from the saracens. 
He was continually alla•med by the intrigues of
the Popes, who were for playing the Masters in Italy;
against whom he bravely maintained his Right. This
occasioned several Excommunications to be thundred out
against him by the Popes, who raised great disturbances. 
From hence had their rise the two famous Factions in
Italy, whereof those who sided with the Pope, called
themselves Guelfs,
         The •ue•fs and G•b••lins. 
          but these who were for the Emperour,
Gibellins; which two Factions, for a considerable
time after, occasioned great Commotions in Italy: And
tho Frederick behaved himself bravely against the Pope
and his Associates, yet the Popes Excommunication,
had such powerful Influence in that superstitious Age,
that, after the Pope had solemnly deposed him in the
Council held at Lyons, some Princes of Germany did
choose Henry,
         1245. 
         Landgrave of Thuringia their King, who
was commonly called the King of the Priests; but he
dying in the year next following, some Princes declared
William Earl of Holland their King; who was
not able to Establish himself, being opposed by Cunrad,
son of Frederick II. who was appointed to succeed his
Father in the Empire. In the mean time his Father
had been very unsuccessful in Italy, who at last died
in the year 1250. Cunrad having left Germany, retired
into his Hereditary Kingdoms of Naples and sicily,
where he died. 1254. 
         William Earl of Holland was slain
in a battel against the Frizelanders, in the year
1256. 
§ 8. A long inte•regnum. With the death of Frederick II. the Authority
of the German Emperours in Italy was quite extinguished:
And that it might not be revived again, the Pope gave
the Kingdom of Naples to Charles Duke of Anjou, who,
by the Instigation of the Pope, caused the young Cunradin
(who being the son of Cunrad, was come to recover
his Herediatary Kingdom, and taken Prisoner in a
battel fought betwixt them) to be executed by the
hands of the Hangman; with whom was extinguished
the Race of the Dukes of swabia. In the mean time
there were great divisions among the German Princes,
concerning the election of a new Emperour; some of
them had chosen Richard Duke of Cornwal, son of John
King of England, and the rest were for Alfonsus X. 
King of Castile; both were elected in the year 1257. 
Richard came on his Journey as far as the Rhine, to take
possession of the Empire, but, for want of Money, was
forced to return home again: And Alfonsus came not
within the sight of Germany. Then there was a complete
and long vacancy of the Throne in Germany;
during which time there was nothing to be seen but
confusion, every body pretending to be Master. These
Civil Disorders were of the worse consequence, because
that about the same time the three great Families
of the Dukes of swabia, the Marquesses of Austria,
and Landgraves of Thuringia being extinct, a great
many aspired to possess themselves of these Countries. 
To be short, the longest sword was then the best
Title, and he that could master another kept him under
subjection; and robbing and plundering was an allowed
exercise at that time. Against these outrageous
Proceedings several of the Cities upon the Rhine entered
into a Confederacy, with whom a great many
other Princes afterwards joyning their Forces, they
demolished the strong Holds of these Robbers,1255. and
cleared the Highways. § 9. R•d•lph •arl of Habsbu••h At last Rodolph Earl of Habsburgh and Landgrave
of Alsace (from whom are descended the present Arch-Dukes
of Austria) was unanimously chosen Emperour;
who,1273. the better to establish himself in the Throne,

Married his three Daughters to three of the great
Princes of Germany, viz. to Lewis Palatin of the Rhine,
to Albert Duke of saxony, and to Otto Marquess of Brandenburgh. 
After the death of Frederick Marquess of
Austria, who had his Head cut off at Naples, together
with Cunradin, Ottocar the King of Bohemia had
possessed himself of Austria, stiria, Crain, the Windishmarck
and Portenau. But Rodolph, who thought
that his Family had more Right to it having •etaken
these Countries, from Ottocar, gave them in Fief to
his son Albert; and to the second, whose name was
Rodolph, the Dukedom of swabia: Besides this, the
Grandson of Albert got Crain and Tyrol. Thus Rodolph
did by obtaining the Imperial Dignity, raise his House
from a moderate state to great Power and vast Riches. 
But tho he was often invited to come into Italy, yet
he could never be perswaded to it, alledging that old
and notorious saying of the Fox, Quia me vestigia terreat;
because the footsteps deter me. Nay he declared
a great many Cities there Free, for sums of money;
by which the Kingdom of Italy, being first torn into a
great many pieces, was quite lost: But Germany he took
into his particular Care, and destroied a great many Castles
there which served for a retreat for Robbers. He
was the first that introduced the use of the German
Tongue in all Publick Courts and Private Transactions,
whereas formerly the Latin Tongue had been made use
of in the like cases. He dyed in the year 1291. His son Albert did lay claim to the Empire, but by
the Interest of the Archbishop of Mayence,
         Adolph 
         Adolph Earl
of Nassau, who was his kinsman, was chosen Emperour;
the Archbishop being in hopes to have, under
him, the supreme Management of the Affairs; but Adolph
not being willing to depend on the Archbishop,
he conceived a hatred against him. some did think it
unbecoming the grandure of the Emperour, that he engaged
in a League with England against France for a
sum of Mony paid to him by the English; but this
might admit of a very good excuse, since besides this,
the English had promissed the Emperour to assist him
in the recovery of the Kingdom of Arclat, a great part
of which France had, during the Troubles in Germany,
         
taken into its possession. On the other hand France
sided with Albert, who being advanced near the Rhine,
the Archbishop of Mayence did assemble some of the
Electors, who being dissatisfied with Adolph, deposed
him, and chose Albert Emperour in his stead. A bloody
Battel was fought betwixt these two near spires, wherein
Adolph being slain,Albert I. being slain, the Imperial Crown remained to Albert:
But because he aimed at nothing more than to
enrich himself, his Reign was both very unglorious and
unfortunate. His Covetousness was at last the occasion
of his death; for his Nephew John Duke of swabia,
whom he had dispossessed of his Country, murdered him
near Rhinefeld. 
         1308. 
        § 10. After his death, Philip King of France endeavoured
to obtain the Imperial Crown, but was prevented
by the Electors,〈◊〉VII. who, upon the perswasion of
the Pope, chose Henry VII. Earl of Luxemburgh. This
Emperour, after he had setled Germany, undertook a
Journey into Italy, with a resolution to suppress the
Civil Commotions there, and to reestablish the Imperial
Authority. The beginning of this undertaking proved
so prosperous, that every body hoped for great success
from it:〈◊〉 by • Monk. But in the midst of this prosperity he was murthered
by a Monk, who had given him a poisoned Host,
he having been hired by the Florentines, the Emperours
Enemies, to commit this fact. In the year 1313. the Electors were again divided
in the Election of a new Emperour, some having given
their Votes for Lewis Duke of Bavaria,
         〈…〉. the rest for
Frederick Duke of Austria. The first was Crowned at
Aix la Chapelle, the latter at B•nn. These two carried
on a War against each other for the Imperial Crown
during the space of nine years, to the great detriment of
the whole Empire: At last Frederick being made a Prisoner
in a battel fought in the year 1323. Lewis became
sole Master of the Empire, and restored its Tranquility. 
But he afterwards went into Italy, to back
the Gibellines, who were of his side, and tho at first
he was very prosperous, yet could he not settle his Affairs
to any purpose,Exc•mmunic•ted b••••e Pope. because the Pope had Excommunicated
him. Wherefore also the Popes Associates in

         Germany, maugre all his resistance, were always too
hard for him; and at last, by the perswasions of the
Pope, stirred up the Electors against him, who chose
Charles IV. Marquess of Moravia, son of John King
of Bohemia, Emperour in his stead; who nevertheless,
as long as Lewis lived, was not much taken notice of. 
He died in the year 1347. It is to be observed, that
the preceding Emperours used generally to make their
Progress thro' the Empire, and to maintain their Court
out of the Revenues belonging to the Empire: But this
Lewis IV. was the first who kept his constant Court in
his Hereditary Country, and maintained it out of his
own Revenue; whose example the succeeding Emperours
followed, the Revenues belonging to the Empire
having been by degrees extremely diminished. § 11. After the death of Lewis,
         Charles IV. 
          there were some
who would have made void the former Election of
Charles, and had chosen in his stead Edward King of
England, who did not think fit to accept of the Imperial
Dignity: The same was also refused by Frederick
Marquess of Misnia: At last Gunther Earl of
swartzburgh was elected; whom Charles caused to be
poisoned, and by his Liberality established himself in
the Empire. During his Reign he gave away a considerable
part of the Dependencies of the Empire, and
among the rest, he granted to France the perpetual Vicarship
of the Kingdom of Arclat; and in Italy he sold
what he could to the fairest bidder: But he was not
so careless of his Kingdom of Bohemia, unto which he
annexed, among other Countries, that of silesia. He
was a great favourer of the Cities which he dignified
with such Privileges, that they might the better be
able to maintain themselves against the Power of the
Princes: The best thing that ever he did, was, that
he caused first to be compiled the Golden Bull,
         T•e Golden Bull. wherein
were set down the Rules to be observed in the elections
of the ensuing Emperours, and Divisions among the Electors,
prevented for the future. He died in the year 1378. 
having not long before by great Presents made to the Electors,
prevailed with them, to chose his son Wenceslaus
King of the Romans:
         Wenceslaus. 1400. 
          But he being very brutish and careless
of the Affairs of the Empire, was deposed by the

Electors, which he little regarded, but retired into his
Hereditary Kingdom of Bohemia, where he lived for a
considerable time. After Wenceslaus was deposed, Jodocus
Marquess of Moravia was chosen Emperour, but he
happening to die within a few months after, before he
could take possession of the Empire,Fred•rick o• Bru•s•ick. 
         Frederick Duke of
Brunswick was elected in his stead, who, in his Journey
to Francfort was, by instigation of the Archbishop
of Mayence,
         Rupert. murthered by the Earl of Waldeck. At
last Rupert, Palatin of the Rhine was chosen Emperour;
who Reigned with great applause in Germany; but his
Expedition into Italy proved fruitless. He died in the
year 1410. § 12. sigismund. After the death of Rupert, sigismund King of
Hungary, Brother to Wenceslaus, was made Emperour;
a Prince endowed with great Qualities, but very unfortunate
in his wars, having, before he obtained the
Imperial Crown, received a great defeat from the Turks
near Cogrelis; which was occasioned by the too much
heat and forwardness of the French Auxiliaries. He caused
John Huss,
         1393. notwithstanding the safe Conduct granted
him, to be burnt at the Council of Constance; whose
death his adherents, who called themselves Hussites, did
revenge with great fury upon Bohemia and Germany;
this War having taken up the greatest part of his Reign. 
He died in the year 1437. After him succeeded his son-in-Law Albert II. Albert II. 
          Duke
of Austria, and King of Hungary and Bohemia, who did
not Reign a whole year. He died in the year 1439. 
whilst he was very busie in making preparations against
the Turks. 
         Fredrick III
          Him succeeded his kinsman Frederick III. 
Duke of Austria; since which time all the succeeding
Emperours have been of this House. During his Reign
several disturbances were raised in Germany, which were
neglected by the Emperour. He also had some differences
with Ladislaus, son of Albert II. concerning
Austria, and was attacked by Matthias Hunniades King
of Hungary; which war he prosecuted with more patience
than vigour. He died in the year 1493. Him
succeeded his son Maximilian I. Maximilian I. 
          who had the good

fortune by his Marriage with Mary the Daughter of
Charles the Hardy Duke of Burgundy, to annex the Netherlands
to the House of Austria. As he was very
fickle in his undertakings, so the success was generally
answerable to it and various; and his Wars with the
switzers, and those in Italy against the Venetians had
but a very indifferent end: The chiefest thing of moment
done by him, is, that whereas formerly all differences
in Germany were decided by the sword, he reestablished
the Peace of the Empire. He died in the year
1519. § 13. Charles V. 
          Him succeeded his Grandson Charles V. King
of spain and sovereign of the Netherlands; under whose
Reign the face of Affairs in Germany was remarkably
changed; which was occasioned by the Religious Differences
set on foot about that time: For the Pope
had caused Indulgences to be sold here in so scandalous
a manner, that the wiser sort began to be ashamed
of it. 1517. Wherefore Martin Luther Doctor of Divinity
and Professor in the University of Wittenbergh, held
a publick Disputation against it;The Reformation. wh• being opposed by
others, all the neighbouring Countries were alarmed at
it. Luther at first did submit himself to the decision
of the Pope, but finding that he favoured the Indulgence
Merchants, and that he was condemned by him, he appealed
to a free General Council, and then began to
go farther, to examine the Popes Authority; and having
laid open some Errours and Abuses which were
crept in among them, his Doctrine was so approved of
by some of the Princes and free Imperial Cities, that
they began to banish the Priests and Monks out of several
places, and to reduce their Revenues. And tho
the Emperour did declare Luther,
         1521. at the Dyet of Worms,
an Out-Law, and endeavoured by several Proclamations
to put a stop to these Proceedings and Innovations;
nevertheless, the Emperour being then engaged in a
war with France, and therefore not in a capacity to
apply himself in good earnest to the suppressing of this
Division▪ 
         Luthers Party grew daily stronger. Perhaps he was afterwards not very sorry, to see the
wound encrease, that he might make the better benefit

of the Cure; there having been a Proclamation published
at the Dyet of spiers,
         1529. which was in no ways
agreeable to the Lutheran Princes, they protested against
the same,The Rise of the Name of Protestants. from whence they are called Protestants. 
In the year next following they delivered a Confession
of their Faith to the Emperour at Augsburgh, and entered
into a Defensive Alliance at smalkald;
         1530. which
League was renewed in the year 1535. The League at smalkald
          when a great
many Princes and Free Imperial Cities were received
into it. This League made at smalkald was a great
eye-sore to the Emperour, who used all means to dissolve
the same: But the Protestants, who now began
to trust to their own strength, standing by one another,
the Hostilities began on both sides, and the Protestants
did bring into the Field an Army of 100000 Men,1546. 
under the Conduct of John Frederick Elector of saxony,
and Philip Landgrave of Hesse. If they had fal'n immediately
upon the Emperour, whose Forces were then
not joined, they might in all probability have worsted
him; but having lost the first opportunity, the Emperour
strengthened himself, that he forced the Protestants to
quit the Field and to disband their Forces. He also
caused a diversion to be given the Elector at home by
his Kinsman Maurice, which had such influence upon
the Free Imperial Cities, that they were obliged to
submit themselves and to pay considerable Fines. In
the year next following the Emperour fell into saxony,
and having defeated the Elector near Michlbergh,
took him prisoner; against whom he pronounced sentence
of Death, which however he changed into an
Imprisonment. Philip Landgrave of Hesse having also
submitted himself, was, contrary to agreement, made
a Prisoner; whereby the Protestant Religion in Germany
was reduced to great extremity. The Electorat
of saxony was given to Maurice Duke of saxony, who
at last being resolved not to permit any longer that both
the Religion and Liberty should be quite destroied,
neither that his Wifes Father the Landgrave of Hesse,
who upon his Parole had surrendred himself to the Emperour,
should be detained a Prisoner, fell so suddenly
with his Forces upon the Emperour, that he was very
near having surprised his Person at Inspruck. 
         1552. 
         Henry II. 
King of France having also made an Inroad on the other

side of Germany, surprized Metz, Tullie, and Verdun. 
King Ferdinand therefore the Emperours Brother
interposing his Authority,A Peace concluded. a Peace was concluded at
Passau; where their Religion was secured to the Protestants,
till matters could be better setled at the next
ensuing Dyet. 1552. The Landgrave was released; as likewise
John Frederick the Elector, who was dismissed out
of prison a little before by the Emperour. 1555. At last the
Religious Peace in Germany was established, at the Dyet
at Augsburgh, where it was provided, that neither Party
should annoy one another under the pretext of Religion,
and that such of the Church Lands and Revenues,
as the Protestants had been possessed of before
the Peace concluded at Passau, should remain in their
possession. An Insurrection of the Boors. The Boors also in Germany raised a most
dangerous Rebellion under the Reign of Charles V:
of whom there were killed above 100000. 1525. In the year
1529. the City of Vienna was besieged by solyman the
Turkish Emperour, but to no purpose, he being obliged to
raise the siege,1532. not without considerable loss: And afterwards
the Turks who were marching with a great Army
into Austria, were beaten back again. In the year 1534. 
the Anabaptists were for erecting a new Kingdom in
Munster in Westphalia, under the Conduct of John, a
Taylor of Leiden, and one Knipperdolling; who received
the dire Reward of their madness. He Resign. At last this great
Prince Charles V. surrendered the Imperial Dignity to
his Brother Ferdinand I. Ferdinand I. 
          King of Hungary and Bohemia,
who united these two Kingdoms to the House of Austria,
he having Married Anna sister of Lewis King of Hungary
and Bohemia, who was slain in the battel fought against
the Turks near Mohatz. He Reigned very peaceably in Germany,
and died in the year 1564. Maximilian II. 
          Him succeeded his son
Maximilian II. who also Reigned in peace, except that
a Tumult happened at that time in Germany, raised by
one William Grumpach and his Associates, who having
first murthered Melchior Zobel the Archbishop of Wartzburgh,
had plundered that City; they also endeavoured
to stir up the Nobility and to raise disturbances in other
places. 1567. This man having been declared an Outlaw, was
protected by John Frederick Duke of saxony, who paid
dearly for it, Gotha, one of his best strong Holds having
been demolished, and he himself taken Prisoner▪ 
         Maximilian
         
died in the year 1576. R•dolph II. 
          Him succeded his son
Rudolph II. who Reigned also very peaceably in Germany,
except that the Hungarian Wars did now and then keep
the Germans a little in exercise; and that in the year 1609. 
the right of succession in the Country of Juliers was
brought in question. At last his Brother Mathias, Arch-Duke
of Austria grew impatient to possess his Brothers
Inheritance before his death,1612. to him Rudolphus surrendered
Hungary and Bohemia, and at his death he left
him his other Countries and the Imperial Crown. § 14. Under the Reign of Matthias,
         Matthias. the ill Humours
did so encrease by degrees in Germany, that towards his
latter days they caused violent Convulsions. The origin
of this war, which lasted thirty years, was this: In
the Religious Peace formerly concluded at Passau, two
Parties were only included, viz. the Roman Catholicks,
and those who adhered to the Augsburgh Confession,Origin of the German Wars. 
the free exercise of Religion being forbidden to all others. 
But some of the states of the Empire, among whom
the chiefest were the Elector Palatin and the Landgrave
of Hesse Cassel, having since that time received the
Reformed Religion, commonly called the Calvinian,
the Roman Catholicks were against their enjoying the
benefit of the Religious Peace. These on the other
hand alledged, that they did belong, as well as the
rest, to the Augsburgh Confession, and that the whole
difference did only consist in some few passages: But
the rest of the Protestants who strictly adhered to the
Words of the Augsburgh Confession, were not for receiving
them into the same Communion, yet it was
their opinion, that they ought not to be prosecuted for
the differences that were betwixt them. But afterwards
these controverted Articles were by the heat of the
Priests explained in so different a manner, that the name
of a Calvinist became as odious to some Protestants, as
that of a Roman Catholick. The Roman Catholicks taking
hold of this opportunity, caressed the old Protestants,
especially those in the Electorate of saxony,
unto whom they represented the Calvinists as a Generation
equally destructive to both Parties; whereby
they hoped to disjoyn them from the rest, and after
they had destroied them, to make the easier work with

the rest of the Protestants. These therefore of the
Reformed Religion, entered into a Confederacy for
their common security; into which there having
been received a great many other Protestant Princes,
it was called the Evangelical Ʋnion. 
         Th• Evangelical Union. In opposition to
this Confederacy, the Roman Catholicks made an Alliance
among themselves, which they called the Catholick
League, whose Head was the Duke of Bavaria, a
constant Rival of the Elector Palatin. There happened
also some other matters which had exasperated both
Parties, viz. that the Protestants had reduced a great
many Church Revenues, after the Peace at Passau;
that the Cities of Aix la Chapelle, and Donawerth, had
been very hardly dealt withal, and some other matters,
which were manifest proofs of the Animosities of both
Parties against one another. § 15. The Bohemian Tumults. Both Parties being thus exasperated and prepared
for War, did administer fuel to that flame
which quickly after broke out in the Kingdom of
Bohemia. The Bohemians pretended, that the Emperour
Matthias had taken from them their Privileges,
and having raised a Tumult, did throw three Persons
of Quality, who spoke in the Emperours behalf, out
of the Castle Windows;1618. and immediatly after entered
with an Army into Austria: In the mean while
Matthias died,Fer•inand I
          whose Nephew Ferdinand (who also
succeeded him in the Empire) the Bohemians had before
his death received for their King; but now, under
pretence that he had broken the Contract made
betwixt him and the Estates,T•e Crown of Bohemia offered to the Electo• 
           Palatin. 
          had renounced Ferdinand,
and offered the Crown to Frederick Elector Palatin. 
This young Prince was perswaded by some of his
Friends, who were of an unsettled spirit, and not
diving deep enough into a business of such Consequence,
to accept of this offer, before he had laid a foundation
for such an undertaking: For the Bohemians
themselves were fickle and unfaithful, Bethlem Gabor
Inconstant. England was not for medling in the
matter; Holland was very backward in giving assistance. 
The Union which they chiefly relied upon, was a
Body with a great many Heads, without vigour, or

any constant Resolution. Besides this, France did endeavour
to dissolve this League, as being not willing
that the Elector Palatin and the rest of the Reformed
Religion, should grow too potent; for fear, that in
time they might afford their assistance to the Hugonots,
whose destruction was then in agitation at the French
Court. In the beginning of this War the Affairs of
Ferdinand looked with an ill Aspect; because Bethlem
Gabor, Duke of Transilvania, fell into Hungary,
in hopes to become Master of that Kingdom; and
there were also great discontents among his subjects
in Austria: but he having recovered himself by the
Alliance made with the Duke of Bavaria,
         The ill succes• of the Elector Palatin. 
          the Elector
Palatin lost, with that unfortunate Battel fought
on the white Hill near Prague, at once all his former
advantages: For Ferdinand soon after reduced Bohemia,
         1620. 
         Moravia, and silesia to obedience. spinola made an
inroad into the Lower Palatinat, which was deserted
by the Forces of the League. The Duke of Bavaria
got the Ʋpper Palatinat and the Electoral Dignity. The
Elector of saxony, who had been very instrumental in
reducing of silesia, had for his reward Lusatia, in Fief
of the Kingdom of Bohemia. 
        In the mean time the Marquess of Durlach,
         Th• War spread in Ge•ma•y. 
          
         Christian
Duke of Brunswick, the Earl of Mansfield, and some
others who were of the Elector Palatins Party, marched
with their Armies up and down the Country, and the
Emperour, under pretence of pursuing them, sent his
Forces into all parts of the Empire. Against these
the Circle of the Lower saxony armed itself, having
made Christian IV. King of Denmark, General of that
Circle: But he having received a great overthrow
near Kings Lutter,
         1626. from Tilly the Imperial General,
the Emperour over-run all the Lower saxony; and having
obliged King Christian to make Peace with him
at Lubeck▪
         
         1629. he began to get footing near the Coast of
the Baltick. 
         The Procl•
           mation concerning Churc• Lan•s. 
        § 16. The Emperour by this success being arrived
to such a pitch of Greatness, that he did not
question but for the future to be absolute in Germany;
         1629. 
         
did publish a Proclamation, enjoining the Protestants
to restore to the Catholicks all such Church Lands
or Revenues, as were taken from them since the Peace
made at Passau. Under this pretence he hoped quickly
to subdue the rest of the Protestant Princes, not questoning
but that the Catholick Estates would easily be
forced to submit themselves to his pleasure. The Protestants, 'tis true, entered into a Defensive
Alliance at Leipsick, but wi•hout any great prospect of
success,Gustavus A•olphus. if Gustavus Adolphus, King of sweedland had
not come to their assistance. This King was induced
to enter Germany, partly because the preservation of
his own state seemed to depend on the Emperours
not getting firm footing on the Baltick, partly because
several of the German Princes had craved his assistance,
partly also because the Emperour had assisted the Poles
against him in Prussia, and he stood in a good corespondency
with France and Holland, who were very
jealous at the Greatness of the House of Austria. 
         1630. This
King came with an Army into Germany, and drove
the Imperial Forces out of Pomerania and the neighbouring
Countries. In the mean time the Imperial
General Tilly had quite destroied the City of Magdeburgh,
and was upon his march against the Elector
of saxony, whom he did not question but to rout quickly:
But King Gustavus having joined his Forces with
those of the Elector of saxony, defeated Tilly, in that
eminent Battel near Leipsick; where the Emperour at
one stroke lost all his hopes which he had conceived
from the happy success of his Arms during the space
of twelve years before. From thence he marched on
to the Rhine, where he made almost miraculous progresses;
but because the Elector of saxony had not so
vigorously attacked the Hereditary Countries of the
Emperour, he had thereby leisure given him to raise
another Army,1632. under the Conduct of Wallenstein;
against whom the King lay encamped for a considerable
time near Nurenbergh; and afterwards in the battel
of Lutzen,
         Gustavus'•
           D••th. tho his side gained the Victory, he lost his
life. 
After his death his Generals and Confederates
carried on the war,Th• Wa• continue•. under the Conduct of Axel
Oxenstem, Chancellour of sweden, with indifferent
good success; but having received an entire defeat
in the battel near Noringen, which they fought
without necessity, they lost all their Conquests. The
Elector of saxony having also concluded a peace with
the Emperour at Prague,
         1634. which was extremely disliked
by the Protestant Party;1635. the Emperour was now
again in hopes to drive the swedes by force out of Germany:
But by the valour and conduct of their Generals
the swedish Affairs began to look with a better face,
who carried the War again into the very Hereditary
Countries of the Emperour. At last all parties began
to incline to a peace; for the Emperour and the Princes
of Germany were tired out with the war; France
began to be divided at home by Commotions; Holland
had made a separate peace with spain; and the swedes
feared that the Germans, of whom was composed the
greatest part of their Army, might at last grow weary
of being instrumental in the Ruin of their native Country,
or that one unfortunate blow might chance to rob
them of the Fruits of their former Victories; a Peace
was therefore concluded at Osnabrugge with sweden,
and at Munster with France;
         Peace of Osn••rugge and France. 
          by virtue of which the
swedes got a part of Pomerania, Bremen, and Wismas, and
five Millions of Crowns for the payment of their Forces. 1648. 
         France kept Brisac, suntgaw, a part of Alsace and Philipsbourg. 
By this Peace the Authority of the states
of Germany and the Protestant Religion were Established
at once; and the Emperours Power confined within
such Bounds, that he could not easily hereafter attempt
any thing against either of them; especially since
both sweden and France had a free passage left them,
from whence they might easily oppose him,1637. if he designed
to transgress these Limits. During this war
died Ferdinand II. Ferdinand t•e Third. whom succeeded his son Ferdinand
III. who died in the year 1657. In whose stead
was, in the year next following, elected Emperour his
son Leopold. 
        
§ 19. Leopold. After the Westphalian Peace Germany remained
in peace for a considerable time, except that the
Emperour and Elector of Brandenburgh (at which time
the swedes were engaged in a War with Denmark)
fell into Pomerania;
         1659. but these differences were composed
by the peace made at Oliva. In the year 1663. 
a war began with the Turks;
         War with the Turk
          when the Turks took
New•eusel; but were also, especially near st. Godhart;
soundly beaten. some are of opinion, that if the Emperour
had at that time vigorously purs•ed his Victory,
he might have beaten them out of Hungary; since the
Turks were put into a great consternation by the Persians,
and some Rebellious Bassa's, and the Venetians
did so vigorously push on the siege of Canea: But the
Emperour was so forward in making peace with them,
because, as it is supposed, he was jealous of France. 
And in the year 1672. Germany was again entangled
in a war with France;
         War with France. 
          which was occasioned by the
great progresses of the French against the Hollanders, who
were relieved by the Emperour and the Elector of Brandenburgh:
For tho in the year before the Emperour had
made an Alliance with France, whereby he had promised,
not to meddle in the War if France should attack
one of the Triple Alliance; nevertheless he sent
his Forces towards the Rhine, under pretence that it belonged
to him as being Emperour, to take effectual care,
that the flame which was burning in the neighbouring
Countries, might not prove destructive to Germany: And
the Elector of Brandenburgh made heavy complaints,
that the French had made great havock in his Territories
of Cleves. The French on the other side sent an
Army towards Germany, in hopes to oblige the Emperour
not to concern himself in this War; but the
French having not only committed great outrages in the
Empire, but also taken into possession the City of Treves,
and made great havock in the Palatinat, the Emperor
perswaded the states of the Empire to declare war against
France. sweden was also afterwards engaged in
the same war;Peace of Nim•e••n▪
           
          which was ended by the peace made
at Nimwegen;
         1679. whereby France got Friburgh in Bris
           •an,
in lieu of Philipsburgh; and sweden was restored

to those Provinces which it had lost during the
war. § 18. The Genius o• this Nation. If we duly consider the Genius of this Nation,
which inhabits this great Empire, it is most evident,
that this Nation ever since the memory of Men has
been very brave, and addicted to War; and that Germany
has been an inexhaustible source of souldiers,
since there is scarce ever any want of Men, who are
ready to serve for Money: and if they are once well
Disciplined, they are not only good at the first onset,
but are very fit to endure the hardships and inconveniences
of a long war. There are not in any other Nation
so many to be met withal, that are ready to list
themselves in Foreign service for Money; neither •is
there any Country in Christendom where greater Forces
both of Horse and Foot may be raised, than in Germany
But besides this, the Germans are much addicted
and very fit for Commerce, and all sorts of Handycrafts
Trade; and not only the Inhabitants of the Cities
do apply themselves with great industry to the same;
but also if a Countryman gets a little beforehand in
the World, he puts his son to some Handycraft's Trade
or another, tho a great many of them afterwards run
into the Wars. They are generally very free and honest,
very ambitious to maintain the so much praised
Fidelity of the antient Germans; they are not easily
stirred up to raise Tumults, but commonly are willing
to remain under the same Government where they are
Educated. § 19. Tho the German Empire has no Possessions
abroad,Nature of 〈◊〉 soil. except you would account Hungary to be such;
which is under subjection to the House of Austria;
nevertheless it is a Country of a vast extent by it self,
which is full of great and small Cities, Towns and
Villages: The Ground is very Fertile in general, there
being very few spots to be met withal of any large extent,
which do not produce something or another for
the sustenance of Mankind; so that there is every where
great plenty of all sorts of Provisions. Germany also
abounds in all sorts of Minerals, especially in Mines

of silver,Its Commodities. Copper, Tin, Lead, Iron, Mercury, and other
sorts. It has abundance of springs that furnish waters
for the boyling of salt: and those several great Navigable
Rivers wherewith it is adorned, make it very commodious
to transport its Commodities from one place to another. 
The Commodities of Germany are these; v•z. 
Iron, and all sorts of Instruments made of it, Lead,
Mercury, Wine, Corn, Beer, Wooll, course Cloth,
all sorts of Linnen and Woollen Manufactories, Horses,
sheep, &c. If therefore the Germans would apply
themselves to imitate these Manufactories at home,
which are now Imported by Foreigners, or else would
be contented with their own, and not make use of
Foreign Manufactories, those Commodities which are
Exported out of Germany, would much surpass these
which are Imported; and therefore it would of necessity
grow very Rich, especially since a considerable
quantity of silver is digged out of the Mines there. § 20. Form of Government As for the Form of Government in Germany,
it is to be considered, that it is not like some Kingdoms,
where the Kings have the whole Power in their
hands, and according to whose commands the subjects
are obliged to comport themselves; neither is the sovereign
Power here circumscribed within certain bounds,
as it is in some Kingdoms of Europe, where the Kings
cannot exercise an absolute sovereignty without the
consent of the Estates: But Germany has its particular
Form of Government, the like is not to be met withal
in any Kingdom of Europe, except that the antient
Form of Government in France came pretty near it. 
Germany acknowledges but one supreme Head, under
the Title of the Roman Emperour; which Title did at
first imply no more than the sovereignty over the City
of Rome, and the Protection of the Church of Rome
and her Patrimony. This Dignity was first annexed
to the German Empire by Otto I. but it is long ago
since the Popes have robbed the Kings of Germany
of this Power, and only have left them the bare Name. 
But besides this, the Estates of Germany, some of which
have great and potent Countries in their possession,
have a considerable share of the sovereignty over their

subjects; and tho they are Vassals of the Emperour
and Empire, nevertheless they ought not to be considered
as subjects, or only as potent or rich Citizens
in a Government; for they are actually possessed of the
supreme Jurisdiction in Criminal Affairs; they have
power to make Laws and to regulate Church Affairs,
(which however is only to be understood of the Protestants)
to dispose of the Revenues arising out of their own
Territories; to make Alliances, as well among themselves
as with Foreign states, provided the same are
not intended against the Emperour and Empire; they may
build and maintain Fortresses and Armies of their own,
Coin Mony, and the like. This grandeur of the Estates,
'tis true, is a main obstacle that the Emperour cannot
make himself absolute in the Empire, except it be in
his Hereditary Countries; yet this has been always observed,
the more potent the Emperour is, the more he
has exercised his Authority, and the Estates have been
forced to comply with his commands: and it is certain,
that the grandure of the Estates, except what is contained
in the Golden Bull concerning the Electoral
Dignity, was more founded upon antient Customs and
Precedents, than any real Constitutions; till in the
Westphalian Peace their Rights and Authority have been
expresly and particularly confirmed and established. § 21. stren•th and weakn•ss of this Empire. Tho it is certain that Germany within itself
is so Potent, that it might be formidable to all its
Neighbours, if its strength was well united an rightly
emploied; nevertheless this strong Body has also its
infirmities, which weaken its strength, and slacken
its vigour: its irregular Constitution of Government is
one of the chief causes of its Distemper; it being neither
one entire Kingdom, neither properly a Confederacy,
but participating of both kinds: For the
Emperour has not the entire sovereignty over the whole
Empire, nor each Estate in particular over his Territories;
and the former is more than a bare Administrator,
yet the latter have a greater share in the sovereignty
than can be attributed to any subjects or Citizens
whatever, tho never so great. And this seems to be
the reason why at last the Emperours did quit their

pretensions upon Italy, and the Kingdom of Arclat;
because these potent Princes of Germany,
         Wh• the Emperour quitted the Kingdom of Arclat. 
          and the turbulent
Bishops, who were continually stirred up by the
Popes, used to give them so much work, that they had
enough to do to take care of Germany as the main
stake, without being able to concern themselves much
about other parts. Yet do I not find any instances
in History, that any of the antient Emperours did endeavour
to subdue the Princes, and to make himself
absolute Master of Germany. But this ambitious Design
Charles V. as it seems, was first put upon by the spaniards,
or, as some will have it, by Nicolas Pereno•
Granvel. And truly the Electors had the same reasons
not to have admitted him to the Imperial Dignity,
as they had not to admit Francis I. King of France:
And common Reason tells us,What is the Interest of the Electors. that no Nation that
has the Power of Electing a Prince, ought to choose
such a one as if possessed before of a considerable Hereditary
Estate, that he may think it his Interest to
take more care of that than the Elective Kingdom:
For he either will certainly be very ca••less of the Interest
of the Elective Kingdom, or else he will make
the Interest of the Elective Kingdom subservient to
that of his Hereditary Countries, and make use of the
strength of the first to maintain the latter, and render
it more Powerful; or else he will endeavour, by making
himself sovereign over the Elective Kingdom, to
make it dependent on his Hereditary Estate. Germany
found all these three inconveniencies by experience,
under the Reign of this Emperour;The Conduct of Charles. 
          for he came very
seldom into Germany, and that only en passant: He
never made the true Interest of Germany the Rule of
his Designs, but all was carried on for the grandeur
and increase of his House; and at last, under pretence
of Religion, he attempted to suppress entirely the antient
Liberty of the Estates. On the contrary, if Germany
had an Emperour at that time who had not been
possessed of any Countries, or at least an inconsiderable
part without the Empire, the true Interest of the
Empire would have been his Rule; and it would have
been his business not to side with either of these two
Potent and couragious Nations of the French and spaniards,
         
but to have looked upon them like an Arbitrator,
and whilst they had been fighting together to have,
according to the circumstances of Affairs, sometimes
ballanced one, sometimes another, so that one might
not become Master of the other; and thereby gain such
advantages, as might prove prejudicial to Germany:
For it is a far different case, whether I come in betwixt
two Parties as a Mediator, or whether I am
engaged to one certain Party: For in the first Case,
I can engage my self as deep as I think fit, and at least
take care to come off harmless; but in the latter case
I must needs be a loser, let things go how they will,
and at last another shall reap the Fruits of my Labour. And to give a specious Colour to these Consequences,Of the Ga•
           ranties of the Circle of Bur•undy. 
         
so perjudicial to Germany, Charles V. did gain this
Point, at the Dyet of Augsburgh, upon the Estates, at
that time,1548. when having brought the Protestants very
low, no body durst oppose it, that they should take upon
them the Guarantie of the Circle of Burgundy;
whereby Germany was obliged to be always engaged
in the Wars betwixt spain and France, and with its
Treasure and Men to assist the spaniards in the defence
of the Netherlands. I must confess, that it is not the
Interest of Germany, to see these Countries fall altogether
into the hands of France; nevertheless it is not absolutely
necessary that the Estates in Germany should
Ruin themselves for their sake; since there are others
also, who are better able, and have the same Interest
that Germany has, to preserve these Provinces. The
attempt which Charles V. made against the Protestant
Religion in Germany, was a true spanish Design: For not
to mention here the notorious Falsities in the Roman Catholick
Religion, I cannot for my life see, what could move
the Emperour, if his aim had been for the sole Interest of
the Empire, to act contrary to the general Inclination of
the Nation, and not rather to take hold of this so favourable
opportunity, to free himself from the Tyranny
of the Popes, who for several Ages together had trampled
upon the German Empire; and with the superfluous
Church-Lands, to encrease his own, and the
Revenues of the Empire, or at least to give liberty to
the Bishops to Marry without quitting their Church

Benefices. If the Emperour would have given a helping
hand, the Reformation would have been as easily
setled in Germany, as it was in sweden, England and
Denmark
        After these spanish states Maxims had lain a while
dormant,Ferdinand pursu•s th• 
           spanish M•xims. they were at last revived, and that with more
vigour, under the Reign of Ferdinand II. besides a great
deal of misery which did from thence accrue to Germany:
this was the cause that the Estates of Germany, to
preserve their Liberty, were obliged to seek for Foreign
Aid, by which means they maintained their Liberty;
but it had been questionless more advantageous to Germany,
not to have wanted the assistance of Foreigners,
who were not forgetful to make their own advantage
by it. Now if it may be supposed, that there are some
remnants of the spanish Leaven, it may easily be conjectured,
what jealousie and distrusts must be betwixt
the Members of the Empire, and how contrary and different
their Counsels and Actions must needs be: and
tho perhaps by setling a good understanding betwixt
the supreme Head and Estates, a medium might be
found out to obviate this and some other inconveniencies,
yet the•e reign various and great Distempers
amongst the Estates themselves, which seem to render
the best Remedies and Counsels either ineffectual, or
at least very difficult: Among these must be counted
the Religious Differences betwixt the Catholicks and
the Protestants in general; which Differences do not
only depend on the several Opinions in Matters of
Faith, but also on a Worldly Interest; the Catholicks
endeavouring upon all occasions to recover such Possessions
as were taken from them since the Reformation;
and the Protestants being resolved to maintain themselves
in the Possession of them. Wherefore it has been
observed, that sometimes the Roman Catholicks have
been more guided by their particular Interest, and by
their Clergy, than by that of the Publick. Nay, it
is to be feared, that if Germany should be vigorously
attacked by a potent Foreign Enemy, that some of the
Popish Bigots would not be so backward in submitting
themselves under the yoke, and be willing to lose
one Eye, provided the Protestants might lose both. 
Beside, the Protestants are again sub-divided into
two Parties;T•• difference betw•xt h• Protestants. there being among them some differences
concerning several Articles of Faith; which, by the
heat of the Clergy, were widened to that degree,
that both Parties were brought to the very brink of
Ruin. The great number of Estates augments the
Distemper, it being next to an impossibility, that among
so many, there should not be some, who either prompted
by their passions, obstinacy, or for want of Understanding,
may not deviate from the true Interest,
or be misled by ill Counsellours to act against the same;
so that it would be a miracle to see so many Heads not
well united. The Estates are also very unequal in Power;
from whence it often happens, that some of the most
Potent are for being like sovereigns, and therefore being
inclined rather to act according to their particular
Interest and Grandeur than for the Publick, they make
little account how they Ruin the less powerful. These
therefore, when they see that the Laws cannot protect
them, are at last obliged to take more care of
their own preservation, than of the Publick Liberty,
as thinking it indifferent by whom they are oppressed. 
Not to mention here, the jealousies which is betwixt
the three Colleges of the Empire, and the several pretensions
and differences which are among some of the
Estates: I could wish that I could find out as easie a
remedy against these and some other the like Diseases,
as I have enumerated them, and demonstrated their
pernicious Consequences. § 22 As to the Neighbours of Germany,
         〈…〉 the Turks
border upon stiria, Croatia, and Hungary: The two
last do not properly belong to Germany, but yet
belong to the House of Austria, and are like a Bulwork
to it; so that Germany is much concerned in the preservation
of them. The Turkish Emperour has greater
Revenues out of his vast Territories, and perhaps is
able to raise a greater number of Men than the Germans
can do; nevertheless he is not so formidable to
them: for the Hungarian Wars are very troublesom
to the Turks;
         T•e Turks. because the Asiatick Forces, and other
supplies of Provision and Ammunition, are not without

great difficulty carried so far; neither can these Forces
be put into Winter Quarters there, as being not used
to so cold a Climate, the neighbouring depopulated
Provinces being also not able to maintain them. The
Turks also are in continual fear, that, as soon as they
have bent their whole Force against Hungary, the Persians
may fall upon them on the other side, or some of
the Bassa's towards the East Revolt from them. And
a well Disciplined Army of Germans, will scarce shrink
before all the Turkish Forces; and when Germany is
resolved to stand the brunt, the Turks will, I believe,
qu•ckly be weary of attacking it. Italy. 
         Italy is in no ways
to be compared with Germany either for its strength or
number of Men, besides that it is divided into several
states, by which it is disabled to attack any Foreign
state, much less so Potent an Empire, which being
possessed of some Passes leading into Italy, might in
time take an opportunity to renew its pretensions upon
that Country. The switzers are very good Neighbours to Germany,
         •h• swisse. 
as having neither will nor power to attack it, especially
since they are destitute of good Horsemen: Neither
can Poland compare its strength with Germany;
         Poland. for tho
the Poles can bring a great number of Horse into the
Field, yet they are not to be compared with the German
Horse, much less their Foot, to the German Infantry:
wherefore the Poles cannot undertake any considerable
and if the Poles should enter into an Alliance with another
Prince, and make a diversion to the Germans, by
falling upon the back of them, it would not be difficult
for the Germans to be even with them; since they are
not well provided with Frontier Places, or any strong
Holds within the Country which are able to withstand
an Enemy; whereas in Germany they would meet with
Places which would give them sufficient work: And
in such a case perhaps the Muscovites might easily be
prevailed withal to fall vpon the back of them: but it
is not to be supposed, that such a Commonwealth as
this will easily attempt an offensive War against its
Neighbours; yet it is of great consequence to Germany,
that Poland may not be brought under subjection
to the Turks, or any other Power. And these
two Nations are able to do one another considerable

services, if they would with their Joint-Forces attack
the Turks. 
        Denmark has no pretensions upon Germany,
         Denmark. and the
best Land-Forces of the Danes being Listed in Germany,
their Army may be Ruined, only by the Emperours recalling
the Germans out of that service, if they should
attempt any thing against the Empire. Neither do I
believe that Germany, but especially the Circles of the
Higher and Lower saxony, will be so careless of their
own Interest, as to let Denmark become master of Hamborough
and Lubeck. 
        England cannot do any harm to Germany,
         Englan•. except by
disturbing the Trade of Hamburgh; tho it seems to be
the Interest of the English, rather to enjoy the benefit
of their Free Trade there. On the other hand, the
Germans may do a service to the English against the
Hollanders, by Land, whilst these are engaged with them
in a War at sea. Holland has neither power nor inclination to attack
Germany:
         Holla•d. For if the Germans should be recalled out
of the service of the Dutch, their Land-Forces would
make but a very indifferent show: Neither can they
reap any benefit by making new Conquests; but it
seems rather to be for their purpose to keep fair with
the Germans, that in case of a War with their Neighbours,
they may make use of their assistance. spain cannot pretend to do any considerable mischief
to Germany,
         sp•i•. if the Head and Members are well united;
but if it should joyn with the Head against the Members
it may prove mischievous, especially by the assistance
of their Money: but in such a case there would
questionless not be wanting some that would oppose
its designs. swedeland alone is not so powerful as to be in any
ways formidable to Germany;
         sweden. neither is this Kingdom
for making any more Conquests on that side, since thereby
it would lose more of its own strength, than it
can gain by them: but on the other hand, it is of
great Consequence to sweden, that the state of Religion
and of the Government, remain in the same condition
as it was setled in the Westphalian Peace; neithat
Germany be subjected or ruled by any absolute
Power. France has of late made itself so Powerful,France. that this
Kingdom alone may do more mischief to the Germans,
than any of the rest of their Neighbours. France, in
consideration of its Form of Government, has a considerable
advantage over Germany; for the King there
has all the best Men, and the Purses of his subjects at
command, and employs them as he thinks fit: But
however such is the strength of Germany, that if well
united, it need not much dread France; for Germany
is capable of raising as numerous, if not more numerous
Armies, than France, and may as easily recruit
them: Besides this, the German souldiers (every thing
duly considered) will scarce turn their backs to the
French. There might also be a way found out, for
Germany to keep always a sufficient Army on foot
against France; at least it is not easily to be supposed,
that if France should attack Germany in good earnest,
all the rest of Europe would be lookers on: but if Germany
be divided within it self, so that either one Party
should join with France, whilst some others stand Neuters,
till France has devoured some of the Neighbouring
states, then nothing but fatal Consequences can attend
it. CHAP. IX. Of DENMARK. § 1. 〈…〉 Kingdom. 
         DENMARK is one of the most antient
Kingdoms in Europe, which was Established
a great many years before the Birth
of our saviour, but for want of good Histories it cannot
be precisely determined at what time it had its
beginning, nor how long each of its antient Kings
Reigned, or what were there great Deeds. We will
not therefore detain the Reader by inserting here there
bare Names, but only to touch upon such matters as
are with some certainty transmitted to Posterity. Among
the most antient Kings,〈◊〉III. 
         Frotho III. is most famous,
who, 'tis said, did Reign just before the Birth of
Christ, and was a most Potent Monarch, who Ruled over
Denmark, sweden, Norway, England, Ireland, and other
Neighbouring states. The Borders of his Territories
were on the East-side Russia, and on the West-side
the Rhine. 'Tis also related, that he Conquered the
Vandals, which lived then in these Countries that
now are called Pomerania and Mecklenburgh, and that
he was the first King that stiled himself King of the
Vandals. Gotrick 'tis said, did assist Wittekind, the
King of the saxons, against Charles the Great. Erick is commonly reckoned to have been the first
Christian King of Denmark (tho some pretend,Eric• I. that his
Brother Herald,
         846. who Reigned before him, was the first. )
Under this Kings Reign the Christian Religion was
propagated in Denmark by the help of Ansgarius, then
Bishop of Bremen; which afterwards King Gormo II. 
endeavouring to root out again, was forced by the Emperour
Henry, sumamed the Bird Ketcher, to grant the
free Exercise of the Christian Religion throughout his
Kingdom. His son Harald was attacked by the Emperour

         Otto I. from whom the sea betwixt Jutland
and Holland has got the Name of Otten sound; because
the Emperour there threw in his Lance to mark the
utmost Limits of his Expedition. suen O•tt•. His son suen Otto
came to the Crown in the year 980. who being taken
Prisoner by the Jutins, was redeemed by the Women,
who gave their Gold and silver Ornaments for his
Ransom: In recompence of which he granted them this
Privilege, that whereas they used only to have a small
Portion in Mony out of their Fathers Inheritance, they
for the future should have an equal share with the Males▪
He also Conquered a part of England, and died in the
year 1012. His son Canut,
         Canut II. 
          or Cnut II. surnamed the Great,
was King of Denma•k, Norway and England, having
Conquered the latter of these three by force of Arms,
tho England did not remain long under the subjection of
the Danes; for after his death, Harald and only Hardiknut
Reigned in England; after whose death the Danes were
again chased out of England. Besides this, Magnus,
son of s. Olaus King of Norway, made himself Master
of Denmark; which Kingdom however, after his
death, sueno II. obtained, but he was forced to fight for
it against Harald Hardrode, then King of Norway. He
died in the year 1074. Him succeeded his sons Harald
VII. (who Reigned but two years) and Canute IV. 
This King did give great Power to the Bishops in
Denmark▪
          and granted the Tenths of all the Revenues
of the Country to the Clergy. At which the Jutes
being exasperated,1087. slew him at Oden sea; but the Clergy
as an acknowledgement of his Favours bestowed
upon them, placed him in the number of saints, and
his memory was afterwards celebrated with full Cups
at their Feasts, by those who called themselves the
Knutgylden, from him. His Brother Olaus IV. succeeded
him, who died in the year 1095. and after him
Reigned his Brother Erick II. who took Jutin, at that
time a great City in Pomerania. He died in the Ille
of Cyprus in his Pilgrimage to Jerusalem. 
        
§. 2. After his death the whole Kingdom was in great
Confusion, especially when three at once fought for the
Crown, viz. sueno III, Canute VI, and Waldemar I. 
These, after they had waged wars together for many
years, did at last agree to divide the Kingdom into
three parts: but Canute having been assassinated by
sueno, and sueno▪
          again having been slain in a Battel
against Wald•mar,
         Waldemar I. 
          he got the whole Kingdom into his
possession He subdued the Rugians and Vandals▪
         
         1157. who
had hitherto proved very mischievous to Denmark; he
also destroyed the City of Julin. 
         1164. 'Tis related that he
laid the first Foundation of the City of Dantzwick: and
under the Reign of this King, Absalom Bishop of Roshild
first began to build the City of Copenhagen. Waldemar
died in the year 1182. Canute VI. 
          Him succeeded his son Canute
VI. who waged great Wars against the Vandals,
and at last forced their Princes to be his Vassals; taking
upon himself the Title of King of the Vandals or
slaves. He took from Adolf Earl of Holstein, among
other places, the City of Hamburgh, which however
twenty seven years after did shake off the Danish Yoke. 
He having also conquered Esthonia and Livonia, the
Christian Faith was established in these Countries by his
means. He died in the Year 1202. After him reigned his Brother Waldemar II. who at
the beginning was a very fortunate and potent Prince,
and had under his subjection, besides Denmark, the
Countries of Esthonia, Livonia, Curland, Prussia, Pomerania,
Rugen, Meck•enburgh, Holstein, stormar, Ditmarsen
and Wagern, as also the Cities of Lubeck and Lauenburgh. 
But he lost a great part of them again by the following
occasion: Henry Earl of swerin having undertaken a
journey to the Holy Land, had committed, during his
absence, his Lady and Country to the care of Waldemar:
but having been informed, after his return, that
the King had lived in Adultery with his Lady; he,
to revenge this Affront, took him Prisoner by stratagem,
and after he had kept him three years in prison dismist
him, making him pay for his ransom the sum of 45000
marks of fine silver. The Countries of Mecklenburgh
and Pomerania, and the Cities of Lubeck and Duntzwick
         
taking hold of this opportunity, revolted from Waldemar;
Adolf Earl of shauenburgh took from him Holstein
and stormar; the Knights of the Cross took Esthonia
and Livonia. And endeavouring to recover these Countries,
he was vanquished in a Battel fought near Bornhove,
         1227. 
by the Earl of shauenburgh. Yet he recovered
Reval and Esthonia; and died in the year 1241. §. Erick V. 
          13. His son Erick V. succeeded him in the Kingdom,
tho he had also given some parts of it to his other
sons; viz. to Abel, sleswick; to Canute, Blecking•n;
and to Christopher, Laland and Falster. These were
each of them for being sovereigns in these Countries;
but Erick pretending that they ought to be his Vassals,
there were great Commotions in Denmark, till Erick
was miserably murthered by his Brother Abel;
         Ab•l. and
Abel after he had reigned two years was slain by the
Friselanders and Ditmarsians. 
         1250. Whom succeeded his
Brother Christopher I. Aganist this King the Archbishop
of Lunden raised abundance of Troubles,1252. and the King
having imprisoned him,Christ•ph. I. 
          he was by the rest of the Bishops
and Clergy excommunicated, and with him the
whole Kingdom. And at last the King was by them
poisoned,1259. as 'tis thought, with the Host. After him reigned his son Erick VI. Erick VI. 
          who was at Variance
with the Bishops, and engaged in Wars against
sweden and Norway; at last he was taken Prisoner in a
Battel by Erick Duke of Holstein,
         1286. and was barbarously
murthered by some of the great Men of the Kingdom. Erick VII. 
         
He left the Crown to his son Erick VII, who immediately,
in the first year of his Reign, had great contests
with the King of Norway, who had given protection to
to the Murtherers of his Father. He also had some other
Differences with some of the neighbouring states,
and died in the year 1319. Him succeeded his Brother
Christopher II,Christoph. II
          who got his son crowned in his Life
time. This King was banished the Kingdom by his
subjects, who, under pretence of being oppressed with
Taxes, elected in his stead Waldemar Duke of sleswick
their King. But they grew also quickly weary of him,
and recalled Christopher, who afterwards in a battel
fought against this Waldemar lost his son Erick Under1332. 
         
the Reign of this King, schonen being sorely oppressed
by the Holsteiners, who were in Possession of it,
surrendred itself to Magnus King of sweden: And John
Duke of Holstein, perceiving that he could not maintain
it by force, sold all his Right and Title to it, for
70000 Marks▪ fine silver. Under the Reign of this
King, Denmark was torn into so many pieces, that very
few places were left to the King. He died in the year
1333. After his death there was an Interregnum in
Denmark during the space of seven years: In the mean
time the Holsteiners had brought the greatest part of
Denmark under their subjection; till the Danes making
an Insurrection against them, endeavoured to chase them
out of Denmark and for this purpose called Waldemar
the son of Christopher II. (who had been Educated at
the Court of the Emperour Lewis the Bavarian) into
the Kingdom. § 4. Wald. III. 
          
         Waldemar III. did somwhat restore the decaied
state of the Kingdom, having partly forced and partly
bought the Holsteiners out of Denmark: He sold Hisponia
and Reval, to the Knights of the Cross, for 28000
Marks, fine silver; which sum he bestowed most upon
a Journey which he undertook into the Holy Land. But
he got schonen again from Magnus sameck the then
King of sweden, by fair promises; and by an agreement
made betwixt him and Albert, King of swedeland, Gotland
was also surrendred to him, and some other places
belonging at that time to sweden. He was frequently
at Wars with the Hanse Towns, and died in the year
1375. After him Reigned his Grandson Olaus VI. Olaus VI. 
          born of
his Daughter Margaret and Hacquin, King of Norway. 
During his Minority the Mother had the supreme Administration
of Affairs. Having after his Fathers death
obtained the Crown of Norway, he laid also claim to the
Kingdom of sweden, because his Father was son of
Magnus sameck, King of sweden; but he died young. In his stead the Danes and Norwegians received for
their Queen Margaret, his Mother; and she having declared
Erick Pomeran, her sisters Daughters son, her
Associate in the Government, entered into a War against

         Albert King of sweden. But the swedes being in general
dissatisfied with their King, deserted him, acknowledging
Margaret for their Queen. Albert fought a Battel
against Margaret, but was defeated and taken Prisoner
with his son; whom Margaret did not release till after
seven years Imprisonment, under condition that he should
either pay 60000 Marks, fine silver, for his Ransom,
or else resign his Pretensions to the Kingdom of sweden;
and he having performed the last, Margaret caused Eric
Pomeran to be Crowned King of sweden. In the year
next following the Estates of all the three Northern
Kingdoms assembled at Calmar,
         1396. where Erick having
been declared their King, an agreement was made among
them, that these three Kingdoms for the future
should be Ruled by one King. Margaret, who had
been an extraordinary good Queen to Denmark, died
in the year 1412. After whose death Erick was sole
King over these three Kingdoms; but he was in continual
broils with the Holsteiners (who were assisted
by the Hanse Towns) concerning the Dutchy of sleswick;
which differences were at last composed. He
surrendred to his Cousins,Eric Pomerar. the Dukes of Pomerania, the
Island of Rugen, which had been a considerable time
under Danish subjection. 1438. In the mean time the swedes
were grown very discontented, because Erick did not
Govern them according to his Coronation Oath, and
oppressed them by his Foreign Officers; which obliged them
to stand up for the Defence of their Liberty. The Danes also,
seeing that he was very careless of the Affairs of the
Kingdom, and did always live in Gotland, did withdraw
themselves from his Obedience, alledging, among other
matters, that because he had been endeavouring to
Establish his Cousin Bogislaus Duke of Pomerania in
his Throne, in his life time, he had thereby violated
their Right of a Free Election:Christopher. And having chosen
in his stead Christopher Duke of Bavaria,
         1439. 
         Erick's sisters
son, he was Deposed, and retired into Pomerania,
where he ended his life. Christopher Reigned till
the year 1448. with whose Reign the Danes were
very well satisfied. 
§. Chris•ian I. 
          5. After his Death the Danes made an offer of that
Crown to Adolf Duke of sleswick and Earl of Holstein;
But he being very antient and infirm refused to accept
of it, and recommended to them Christian Earl of Oldenburgh,
his sisters son, whom both the Danes and
Norwegians declared their King; and in this Family
these two Crowns have remained ever since, by a continual
succession. This King, soon after, began a War
with the swedes (who had made one Charles Cnutson
their King) because they would have driven the deposed
King Erick out of Gotland; but King Christian,
coming to his assistance, made himself Master of that
Island. Besides this, some of the swedish Nobility, who
were dissatisfied with Charles Cnutson, having sided with
Christian, the War began to be carried on very vigorously
betwixt these two Nations. In this War the
Archbishop of Ʋpsal did attack Charles with such success,
that he obliged him to retire into Prussia, and
Christian was crowned King of sweden. 
         1458. But the
swedes being again dissatisfied with Christian, recalled
Charles Cnutson when the War began afresh: and notwithstanding
Charles Cnutson died in the year 1470,1463. and
Christian came with a great Army into swedeland, yet
could he not maintain himself in the Throne, his Forces
having been defeated near stockholm. In the year 1471
the Emperor Frederick III. gave to him in Fief, Ditmarsen,
as also to the Country of Holstein the Title of a
Dukedom. He married his Daughter Margaret to
James III. King of scotland, giving her for a Dowry
the Orkney Islands and Hetland, which had hitherto been
dependent on the Kingdom of Norway. He died in the
year 1481. In whose stead the Danes and Norwegians
chose his son John their King, who divided the Dukedom
of Holstein with his Brother Frederick. This King
John after he had reigned in peace for a con•iderable
time,John. did at last enter into a War against sweden, and
having defeated the Dalekarls, forced steenure the
Governour to surrender himself and the City of stockholm,
and was crowned King of sweden. 
         1497. But in the
year 1501, he was miserably and shamefully beaten by
the Ditmarsians, whom he would have brought under

his subjection, and afterwards steen sture also drove
him out of sweden. He was in continual broils with
him and his successor suant sture, who were assisted by
the Lubeckers, till these Differences were at last composed;
soon after which he died. §. 1513. 6. Him succeeded his son Christian II, who drew
upon him the Hatred of the Danes,
         Christian II. 
          partly because he
entertained a Woman of mean birth in the Netherlands,
whose name was Duivecke, to be his Mistress, and was
strangely led by the Nose by her Mother sigibirta, a
crafty old Woman; partly because he had caused Torber
Oxe, the Governour of the Castle of Copenhagen, to be,
as 'tis thought, unjustly executed. In the mean time
great Differences were arisen in sweden betwixt steen
sture the younger and Gustave Trolle the Archbishop of
Ʋpsal, the first having destroyed the Castle of steka,
which belonged to the latter. King Christian coming to
the Assistance of the Archbishop took him along with
him into Denmark, where they laid the Design against
swedeland. A Decree therefore was obtained from the
Pope, wherein he having condemned the swedes to undergo
great Penalties for the violence offered to Gustave
Trolle. King Christian, to put this Decree in execution,
sent his Forces into sweden, where steen sture being
slain in an Engagement, the whole Kingdom was put
into Confusion by his Death: And King Christian,
coming at last in person, forced Christina, the Widow
of steen sture, to surrender the City of stockholm. At
last a general Amnesty having been published first,Crowned K. of swede•. 
          he
was crowned King of sweden. 
         1520. But when the swedes
thought themselves most secure, he caused some of the
chief Men, under pretence of the former Violences
committed upon Gustavus Trolle, to be executed by
the Hangman, and committed besides great Cruelties. 
In the mean time, Gustavus Erickson, who had been a
Prisoner in Denmark, having made his Escape arrived
in sweden; and with the assistance of the Dalekarls,
whom he had stirred up, entirely drove the Danes out
of sweden, which ever since has maintained its Liberty
against the Danes. By this time the Hatred of the
Danes against Christian was mightily encreased; and

the Jutes having first of all withdrawn themselves from
their Obedience to him,〈…〉 of his own Kingd it put him into such a Consternation,
that he retreated with his Wife and Children
into the Netherlands. The Danes chose in his stead his
Uncle Frederick Duke of Holstein for their King. Christian,
having raised some Land-forces, did endeavour to
regain the Throne, but they were dispersed again. 
Charles V. also, his Brother in law, was so intangled in
the War with France, that he could not send him sufficient
succours. At last he came with a Fleet into Norway,
where he surrendred himself to Dnut Gyldenstern,
who promised him security. But King Frederick, alleging
that he was not obliged to keep that promise,
made him a Prisoner, and sent him to the Castle of sunderburgh. 
But having resigned his Title to the Kingdom,1532. 
he was removed to the Castle of Callenburgh,
         1546. 
where he died. 1559. 
        § 7. Frederick I. 
          
         Frederick I. entred into an Alliance with Gustavus
King of sweden, and the Hanse Towns, against
the deposed King Christian; and forced the Cities of Copenhagen
and Malmoe, which adhered to Christian, to
surrender themselves to him. He also granted great
Privileges to the Nobility, and died in the year 1533,
the year after he had made Christian II. his Prisoner. 
Him succeeded his son Christian III. Christian III
          who met with
great Opposition at first from Christopher Earl of Oldenburgh
and the Lubeckers, who pretended to restore the
imprisoned Christian to the Throne, and had brought several
Provinces over to their side; but he at last surmounted
these Difficulties, with the Assistance of Gustavus
King of sweden, and made himself Master of Copenhagen. 
And because the Bishops had been all along
against him,1556. they were excluded from the general Agreement;
and having been deposed in the same year,
the Protestant Religion was at the same time established
in Denmark and Norway. He reigned very peaceably
after that time, and died in the year 1558. § 8. Fred•rick II
          His son and successor Frederick II. subdued the
Ditmarsians: then he entred into a War against Erick
King of sweden,
         1560. which was carried on with great

losses on both sides for the space of nine years: at last
a Peace was concluded at stetin, by the mediation of
the Emperour,1570. and the Kings of France and Poland. He
Reigned afterwards very peaceably in Denmark, till
the year 1588. when he died. Under the Reign also of his son Christian IV. Christian IV. 
          the
Kingdom was in great Tranquility, till the year 1611. 
when he attacked the swedish King Charles IX. and
took from him Calmar and Elfsburgh. 
         1613. But he made
Peace with Gustavus Adolph, the son of Charles; by
virtue of which he restored these places unto him, in
consideration of a good sum of Money. 1625. He was entangled
in the Civil Wars of Germany; for he having
been made General of the Circle of the Lower saxony,
he thereby came to be engaged in a War against the
Emperour: But this War proved very disadvantageous
to him, he having received a great overthrow near King
Luttern, and being obliged not only to quit Germany,
but the Imperialists also entered Holstein and Jutland
itself: Yet he recovered all again by virtue of a Peace
made at Lubeck,
         1629. except that he lost the advantage of
some Ecclesiastical Possessions in Germany, which he
intended for his sons. When swedeland was afterwards
engaged in the German Wars, he offered his mediation
betwixt them and the Emperour, in hopes thereby to
recover his losses of the Ecclesiastical Possessions, and
to prevent that the swedes might not get a firm footing in
Germany. In the mean while he was very vexatious
to the swedes, endeavouring by all ways and means to
stop the career of their Victories in Germany, and to
spoil their Trade at home; till at last the swedes being
sorely vexed that their ships were continually detained
and confiscated in the sound, did resolve to put an
end to these inconveniencies; and after they had let
the Danes know, that they would no longer suffer
these Injuries, fell with an Army into Holstein and Jutland,
and at last also into schonen. 
         1643. In this War the
Danes were great losers both by sea and Land, but by
the extraordinary Valour of their King they maintained
themselves,1645. till by the mediation of France, a Peace
was concluded at Bromsebroo; by virtue of which the

         swedes got Gothland, Osel, and Jemperland, and Holland
was given them as a Pledge for the space of thirty
years. The Hollanders also taking hold of this opportunity,
did regulate the Toll of the sound, which hitherto
having been raised at pleasure, had been very
troublesome to them. He died in the year 1648. § 9. Fr••erick III
          Him succeeded his son Frederick III. who upon
the perswasions of the Hollanders,
         1657. attacked the swedes,
promising himself great success against them,War with sweden. 
          at that
time when he supposed that their King Charles Gustavus
had quite weakened his strength against the Poles;
but the swedish King came upon a sudden with an
Army into Holstein and Jutland, and among others, took
the Fortress of Fredericksudde by storm; and there happening
an extraordinary hard Frost at the beginning of
the year 1658. he marched over the Ice, first into Funen,
where he surprised the Danish Troops; from thence
taking his way over Largeland, Laland and Falster, into
Zealand. This prodigious success obliged King Frederick
to conclude a Peace with him at Roshild, by
virtue of which, besides some other advantages, he surrendred
to the swedes, Holland, Bleckingen, schonen,
Bornholm, Bahus, and Drontheim in Norway. 
        But King Charles Gustavus being informed, that by
the perswasions of the Emperour, the Elector of Brandenburgh,
and the Hollanders, the Danes had resolved
to renew the War, as soon as the swedes had left the
Country, or should be again engaged in a War with
Germany or Poland, he resolved to be beforehand with
them, and returning into the Isle of Zealand, took
Cronenburgh,
         〈…〉 C•penhagen. and Besieged Copenhagen by sea and Land. 
In the mean while the Dutch sent a Fleet to Relieve
Copenhagen, against whom the swedes fought with great
bravery: But in the year next following, the swedes
did in vain storm Copenhagen,
         1659. and besides this, lost the
Battel in Funen▪ Bornholm revolted, and Druntheim was
retaken. And tho the Danes endeavoured to carry on
the War against the swedes, hoping to have now after
the death of their King Charles Gustavus, met with an
opportunity to revenge themselves for their former losses;

yet acccording to a Project concluded upon by France,
England and Holland,
         A Peace conclu•ed. a Peace was made near Copenhagen,
almost upon the same Conditions with that concluded
formerly at Roshild, except that Bornholm and
Druntheim remained in the possession of the Danes; in
lieu of which some Lands were assigned to the swedes in
schonen. 
        A Peace being thus concluded,Th• King •eclared absolute an t•e Crown heredi•ar•. the King, at the Dyet
held at Copenhagen, was declared an absolute sovereign,
and the Crown Hereditary; whereby the great Privileges
of the Nobility were abolished, and a new Form
of Government introduced, where the whole Management
of Affairs depends absolutely on the King's pleasure. This King died in the year 1670. Christian. V. 
          Him succeeded his
son Christian V. who after he had put his Affairs into
a good Posture, entred into an Alliance with the Emperor,
Holland and their Confederates. And seeing that
the swedes had been worsted in the Country of Brandenburgh,
he hoped to have met with a good opportunity
to break with sweden. 
         1675. He began therefore with the
Duke of Holstein; who, not foreseeing the Design,
came to him at Rensburgh, whom he forced to quit all
his Advatanges which he had obtained by the Peace of
Roshild, and to surrender into his hands the Fortress of
Tonningen, which he caused to be demolished, and afterwards
took Wismar from the swedes. 
        In the year next following he entred schonen, where he
took Helsingburgh,
         H• mak•th War upon swed•n. 
          
         Landscrone and Christianstad, as also the
Isle of Gotland, with little Resistance. But he having detached
some Troops to invest Halmstad, they were surprized
by the King of sweden, who routed them, and such
as were not slain were all made Prisoners. Not long after,
the whole Danish Army was beaten out of the field
in a bloody Battel fought near Lunden. In the year
1677. King Christian besieged Malmoe, but having
miscarried in a storm which he made upon the place,
he was forced to raise the siege; and soon after received
another Overthrow in a Battel fought near Landscrone
betwixt him and Charles King of sweden. In the
Year next following the Danes were obliged to raise
the siege of Bahus, and to surrender Christianstadt,
         
which reduced to Extremity by Famine: but at sea
they had better success;A Peace. yet, by virtue of a Peace made
betwixt them, they restored all such places as they had
taken from the swedes. 
        § 10. The G•nius o•t is N•
           tion. It is evident, out of antient History, That this
Nation has been formerly very warlike: but in our age
the Danes have lost much of their antient Glory, because
the Nobility have been rather for enjoying their
Revenues in Plenty and Quietness, than for undergoing
the fatigues of War, and the Commonalty have followed
their Example. This may also perhaps be alleged
for a reason, that they having seldom been engaged in
any Wars, but with sweden, (except that Christian IV. 
made war in Germany, which however was carried on
chiefly by German souldiers) which could not be of
any long Continuance, the Danes often wanted opportunity
to keep themselves in exercise; especially since
they had the conveniency of making use of the Germans,
whom they listed for money: and the number of Inhabitants
seemed to be but proportionable to the Country,
which is of no great extent. since the King has been
declared soveraign, all means have been employed to
improve the Military force of the Nation; but it seems
that the National Forces, without the help of the Germans,
will not be of any great Consequence, as to
Land-service. Neither is it the King's interest to put
his Nobility upon Martial Exploits, or that they should
grow famous in War, for fear they should make an Effort
to recover their former Privileges. The Norwegians undergo all sorts of hardship with
more Courage and Vigour,The Norwegians. whereunto they are inured
by their Climate and Air. But the Danes, since they
have been Masters of Norway, have always endeavoured
to keep under this Nation, by taking from them all
opportunities of exerting their vigour, and there are
very few left of the antient Nobility in Norway. Yet
the Norwegians are now adays very good seamen, and
the Dutch make good use of them in sea-service: and
a great many of the Inhabitants of North-holland,
where they are addicted to Fishing, were originally of
Norway. 
        
§ 11. Nature of the soil. The country of Denmark is of no great extent, yet
it is generally very Fertile, and fit both for Tillage and
Pasturage; for a great number of Oxen and Horses are
yearly Transported out of Denmark to other places. 
And a considerable quantity of Corn is sent out of
Denmark into Norway and Island. The seas near Denmark
are pretty well stocked with Fish, which however
are rather for the benefit of the Inhabitants, than for exportation. 
There are little or no Manufactories there,
the Inhabitants being not fitted for such works; neither
is there any Commodities fit for Exportation in great
quantities. On the other hand, the Danes are obliged
to Import Wine, salt, good Beer, and Woollen Manufactury
for Cloaths. They have begun to bring spices
themselves out of the East-Indies, where they have
a small Fort upon the Coast of Cormandel. The Toll,
which is paid by Foreigners in the sound in ready money,
is a very good Revenue in Denmark. Which is
the reason why the Danes can scarce forgive the swedes,
that they do not pay this Tributary Toll to Denmark▪
Norway is for the most part a very raw Country, yet it
produces several Commodities fit for exportation, viz. dried
and salted Fish in great quantity, Timber, Board, Masts,
Tar, Pitch, and the like. There are also in Norway, silver,
Copper, and Iron Mines. But it produces not Corn
sufficient in quantity for the maintenance of its Inhabitants,
nor to brew Beer; besides it wants also the same
Commodities which are wanting in Denmark. As for
its situation its very commodious, to Export and Import
Merchandises to and from other sea-Coasts in Europe. 
Island is stocked with Fish, some salted Flesh, and very
good Down Feathers, which the Inhabitants are fain
to exchange for such Commodities as are, besides Fish
and Flesh, requisite for the sustenence and convenience
of Life. The Fenock Islands do for the most part live
on their sheep and Fish. Besides that, Denmark cannot
raise a considerable Army of its Natives,I•s defects. this is also
a great weakness to this Kingdom, that not only Norway
and Denmark are separated by the sea, and cannot
keep correspondency together but by that way; but also
that this Kingdom is divided into so many Islands;

so that if an Enemy once becomes Master at sea, he
must needs prove very troublesom to Denmark. 
        § 12. N•ighbours of Denmark. 
          As to the Neighbours of Denmark, it Borders
on one side upon Germany; for Holstein, which belongs
to the present Royal Ramily, is a Fief of the Empire. 
And tho the Land Forces of Denmark do not come to
any comparison with those of Germany,
         Germany. and Jutland
lies quite open on that side; yet the Islands are very
secure from the Germans, who are not provided with
shipping, except it should happen that the great and
lesser Belt should both be frozen, which happens very
rarely. Neither is there any great probability that these
two states should differ, except the pretensions upon
Hamborough, which the King of Denmark will not easily
let fall, should furnish an occasion for War. And to
speak truly, it is so delicious a morsel, that it may easily
provoke an Appetite. But it will be a very difficult
task for the King of Denmark to attain his aim
by open force, except there should happen a very strange
juncture of Affairs, or that the inward Divisions, or
else by treachery, this City should give an occasion for
its Ruin. In the mean while it is not easily to be supposed,
that the Neighbouring German Princes should
suffer that a City of so great Consequence should fall
into the hands of a Foreign Prince. In fine, it is of
vast Consequence to Denmark, to hold a good understanding
with Germany, since from thence it must draw
the greatest part of its Land-Forces, wherewith to defend
itself against swedeland. 
        With the swedes Denmark had been in continual
Broils for a considerable time;sw••en. and it seems that there
is an old grudge and animosity betwixt these two Nations,
arising chiefly hence, that the Danes have formerly
always endeavoured to make themselves Masters
of sweden, and to reduce this Kingdom into the same
condition as they had done Norway. Besides, that afterwards
they have made it their business, by ruining
their shipping and Trade, to prevent the growing
Greatness of sweden: But sweden has always vigorously
defended itself, and in latter times has gained great
advantages upon Denmark; for the swedes have not

only recovered schonen, and secured West Gothland,
by the Fortress of Bahus; but they have also a way
open into Jutland, out of their Provinces in Germany. 
On the other hand, the Danes have made it their business
hitherto, by making Alliances with the Enemies
of sweden, to get from them these Advantages. But
if we consider, that these two Kingdoms are now divided
by their natural Bounds to preserve which, France,
England and Holland seem to be mutually concerned;
and that as in human probability Denmark cannot conquer
or maintain itself in swedeland; so the other states
of Europe, are not likely to suffer, that sweden should
become Master of Denmark: It seems therefore most
convenient, that these two Kingdoms should maintain a
good understanding, and be a mutual security to one
another against their Enemies. From Holland Denmark may expect real assistance,Holland. 
in case it should be in danger of being Conquered;
since the prosperity of Holland depends partly on the
free Trade of the Baltic; and if one should become
Master both of sweden and Denmark, he would questionless
keep these Passages closer than they are now. 
But the Danes also are sensible enough, that the Hollanders
will not engage themselves any further in their
behalf, than to keep the ballance even, for fear they
should with an increase of Power, attempt hereafter,
to raise the Toll in the sound at pleasure. But as long
as Holland sides with Denmark,
         England. 
         England will not be fond
of the Danish Party, but rather declare for the other side;
for the preservation of Denmark, and the Trade in the
Baltic, is not of so great consequence to England, as it is
to Holland. 
        The Muscovites may prove very serviceable to Denmark
against sweden:
         Th•
           Muscovites. yet cannot the Danes make any
great account upon an Alliance with them; because it
is very difficult to maintain a Correspondency with
them, especially if the Poles should declare for sweden:
Besides that, the Muscovites, as soon as they have obtained
their aim, commonly have but little regard to
Alliances, or the Interest of their Allies. Denmark can
have no great reliance upon Poland,
         Poland. except that Crown
should be engaged in a War against sweden. 
         France. 
         France has

hitherto shewn no great concern for Denmark, because
it has always been in Alliance with its Enemies; yet
France would not willingly see it ruined, because no
state of Europe would desire the two Northern Kingdoms
should be under the subjection of one Prince:
But I cannot see any reason, why an offensive Alliance
with Denmark, should be profitable to France. spain
is more likely to wish well to Denmark, than to assist
it, except it should happen, that swedeland was engaged
in a War against the House of Austria, or any
other Allie of spain. 
        CHAP. X. Of POLAND. § 1. THE POLEs,
         Origine of the Kingd. of Poland. 
          who anciently were called
samartians, and afterwards slavonians,
derived their Name from the Nature of
the Country which they possess; which lies most upon
a Plain, for Pole signifies in their language a Plain; tho
some are of opinion that the Word Polacki, is as much
as to say, the Posterity of Lechus. This Nation formerly
did inhabit nearer to the Country of the Tartars;
but after vast Numbers out of Germany entred the Roman
Provinces, their places were supplied by the nations
living behind them. And it seems that Poland being
in the same manner left by its Inhabitants, which were
then Venedi or Wends, they made room for the next
that took their Place. These then, as 'tis said, having
taken possession of this Country about the year 550,
did,Lechus. under the Conduct of Lechus, lay there the Foundation
of a new state. Lechus resided at Gnicsen, being
encouraged thereunto by an Eagles Nest which he
found there, and taking it as a good Omen, put an Eagle
into the Arms of the new Commonwealth, giving to
that City the name of Gnicsen, which in the Polish
Language signifies a Nest. This Nation first setled it
self in that part of the Country, which now goes by the
name of the great and lesser Poland; neither did their
Limits extend any further, tho since that time they are
mightily encreased. § 2. Twelve Vayvods or Governours. The first Governours of this Nation did not assume
to themselves the Title of Kings, but only that of
Dukes; and the first form of Government was very
inconstant: for after the Race of Lechus was extinguished
(tho it is uncertain how many of them, and for

         〈1 page duplicate〉
         
         〈1 page duplicate〉
         
how long a time they Ruled, or what were their Atchievments)
twelve Governours, which in their Language
are called Vayvods, did administer the Government,
who having at first regulated and refined this barbarous
People by good Laws and Constitutions, at last were
divided among themselves. 700. Wherefore the Poles elected
for their Prince one Cracus,
         Cracus. who having restored the
Commonwealth to its former state, built the City of
Cracovia, so called after his own Name, which he made
his place of residence. Lechus II. 
          Whose youngest son Lechus II. 
to obtain the Principality, murthered his elder Brother;
but as soon as the Fact was discovered, he was banished
the Country. After him ruled a Virgin, whose Name
was Venda,
         Venda. the only Daughter left of the Children of
Cracus,
         750. who having vanquished one Ritiger a German
Prince that pretended Mariage to her out of a blind superstition,
drowned herself in the River of Weixel. 
After her death the administration of the Government
returned again to the Governours or Vayvods, which continued
for some time, till the Poles elected again for
their Prince a Goldsmith called Premislus, who is also
called Lescus I. Lescus I. 
          because he had by a stratagem defeated
the Moravians, who had made an Irruption
into Poland. But he leaving no Issue behind him
a Horse Race was instituted, with condition that the
Victor should succeed in the Government. One of the
Competitours had laid Iron Hooks in the Ground, by
which means the others Horses having been •amed he
was the first that came to the Goal, but the Fraud being
discovered he was killed upon the spot. In the mean
while a certain poor Fellow on foot had run the Race and
was the next to the Impostor, whom the Poles declared
their Prince. 776. His name was Lescus II. and as some say,
was slain in the Wars against Charles the Great. Lescus II. 
          Him
succeeded his son Lescus III. 804. who having appeased Charles
the Great,Lescus III. 
          with Presents, made Peace with him, either
as an unequal Allie, or else by acknowledging himself
his Vassal. Popiel I. 
          He left Poland to his son Popiel, whom he
had begot in Wedlock; but to his natural sons he gave
the neighbouring Countries of Pomerania, Mack, Ca••ubia,
with some others. Popiel II. 
          Him succeeded his son Popiel II. 
an ill man, who upon the perswasion of his Lady murthered

his Father's Brothers, 'tis reported that out of
their dead Bodies came forth Mice, which devoured
Popiel with his Wife and Children. § 3. 820. After his Death there was an Interregnum full
of troubles, till the Poles declared Piastus,
         Piastus. a Countryfellow
born at Crusswitz, their Prince, from whom ever
since such of the Natives as obtained the Royal Dignity,
were called Piasti. His Posterity has reigned for a
long time in Poland, from whom also descended the race
of the Dukes of Lignitz and Brieg in silesia, which is
but lately extinguished. 'Tis said that he was 120 Years
old before he died. Zicmovitus. His son Zicmovitus began his Reign
in the Year 895. a Warlike and brave Prince; whom
succeeded his son Lescus IV. Lescus IV. 
          a good and peaceable Prince. 
Much of the same temper was his son Zicmovistus,
         902. who
began to Reign in the Year 921. Zicmovistus. This Prince had but
one son, who being blind was in the seventh Year of
his Age (in which Year, according to the Custom of
those times, his Head was to be shaved, and he to receive
his Name) restored to his sight, which was then
taken for an Omen, that he should be enlightened with
the Christian Faith. Micislaus 〈◊〉
          His Name was Micislaus I. and
began his Reign in the Year 962. He having a great
many Wives and no Children, occasioned in him a desire
to turn Christian, for some Germans representing to him,
that if he left the Heathenish superstitions he would
certainly beget Children; he was perswaded by them
to remove his Heathenish Wives, which he did, and married
Dambrateca, the Daughter of Bogislaus Duke of
Bohemia. Before he married her, he was baptized himself,
and first introduced the Christian Religion into Poland,
         965. 
as also that custom which has obtained since there,
that at the time when the Gospel is read in the Mass,
the Men half draw their Cymetars to signify that
they were ready to fight for the Christian Faith. § 4. 999. Him succeeded his son Boleslaus Chrobry, who
was by the Emperour Otto III. Boleslaus Chrobry, the first King of Poland. 
          dignified with the Title
of King, who also remitted unto him all the Pretensions
which the former Emperours had upon Poland; and
this in consideration for the kind entertainment which

he had received from Boleslaus in his Pilgrimage to the
Grave of Albart Bishop of Gnicsen, which being then very
famous for some Miracles, was visited by the Emperour
to fulfil his Vow which he had made during a precedent
sickness. This first King of Poland behaved himself
very bravely in his Wars against the Red Russians,
the Bohemians, saxons and Prussians. He also instituted
twelve senators as his Assistants in the administration of
the Government. Miccislaus II. 
          But his son Miccislaus lost for the
most part his Father's Conquests, Moravia having among
the rest been taken from him by the Bohemians. He began
his Reign in the Year 1025. and died in the Year
1034. leaving but one son behind him, whose Name
was Casimir,
         Casimir I. 
          who being an Infant, his Mother Rixa administred
the Government for a while. But the Poles
being dissatisfied with her, she fled with her son into
Germany, who in his Journey in France, assumed the Order
and Habit of a Monk. During his absence, there
were great Disturbances in Poland, Maslaus having about
that time made himself Master of Masuria, which for a
long time after, remained independent of the Kingdom
of Poland. At last the Poles prevailed upon Casimir, to
leave his Monastery and accept the Crown. And to
perswade the Pope to absolve him from his Vow, they
promised, that for each Head, except those of the Nobility
and Clergy, they would contribute yearly a Farthing
towards the maintaining of a perpetual burning
Lamp in the Church of st. Peter in Rome, and cause their
Heads to be shaved above their Ears like Monks. After
he came to the Crown he beat Maslaus and the Prussians,
and restored the Kingdom to its former tranquility. His son Boleslaus surnamed the Hardy,
         Boleslaus the Hardy. did at first
wage War against his Neighbours the Prussians, Bohemians
and Russians with great success;1058. but afterwards giving
himself over to all manner of Debauchery, and having
been checked for that reason by stanislaus the Bishop
of Cracau, who also at last excommunicated him, he
cut him to pieces before the Altar. Then he was excommunicated
by the Pope, and perceiving himself to be
hated by every body, left the Kingdom, and at last murthered
himself. 
§ 5. Ʋladislaus 1082. Him succeeded his Brother Ʋladislaus, who
standing in fear of the Pope, would not at first take
upon him the Title of King. He met with great Troubles
both at home and abroad, which however he overcame
at last. Boleslaus III. 
          Him succeeded his son Boleslaus III. a
brave souldier,1103. who obtained a signal Victory over the
Emperour Henry V. in a Battle fought in the Dogsfield
near Breslau. There was never a Prince in Poland more
Famous for Military Atchievements than himself; it being
related of him, that he fought forty five Battles all
with good success, except the last of all, fought against
the Red Russians, which was lost by the Cowardise of
the Vayvod of Cracovia, unto whom the King for a recompence
sent a Hare-skin and spinning-Wheel, which
so troubled him, that he hanged himself: But the King
also was so troubled at this Defeat, that he died of grief,1139. 
leaving four sons behind him. Ʋladislaus II. 
          Among whom Ʋladislaus
II. obtained a great part of the Kingdom with
the Name of a Prince, yet the other Brothers also shared
several great Provinces among themselves, according to
their Father's last Will. This occasioned great Divisions
and Civil Wars betwixt these Brothers; and Ʋladislaus,
who pretended to dispossess the rest, was himself obliged
to quit the Country. Boleslaus IV. 
          After him Boleslaus Crispus his
Brother was made Prince of Poland,
         1146. who was forced
to wage War against the Emperour Conrade III. and
Frederick I. who would have restored Ʋladislaus. At last
a Peace was concluded betwixt them, by Vertue of which,
Poland remained to Boleslaus, but he was obliged to surrender
silesia, which was then dependent on Poland, to
Ʋladislaus, which being afterwards divided into a great
many Dukedoms, at last fell to the Crown of Bohemia. 
This Boleslaus also received a great overthrow from the
Prussians, his Army having by the treachery of a Guide
been mis•ed into the Moors and Boggs. Him succeeded
his Brother Miccislaus senior,Miccislaus III. 
          but he was deposed for
Male-administration. 1174. Him succeeded his Brother Casimir,
         Casimir. 11780. 
who is only famous for that he chastised the
Prussiant. He died in the year 1194. Lescus V. 
          His son Lescus
surnamed the White, was fain to contend with the banished
Miccislaus for the Kingdom with various success,

till Miccislaus died. 1213. Whose son Ʋladislaus also raised
some Disturbances against him for a while, till at last
he was forced to leave him in the quiet possession of
Poland. 
         The first Inroads o• t•e Tartars. Under the Reign of this Lescus the Tartars
made the first In-road into Russia, and have ever since
proved very troublesome and mischievous to Poland. This
Lescus was forced to wage War with sventopolek,
whom he had constituted Governour of Pomerania. He
having made himself Duke of Pomerania did dismember
it from the Kingdom of Poland. Conrade, also the Brother
of Lescus had got the possession of Masovia and Cusavia,
who being not strong enough to defend himself
against the Prussians, who were fallen into his Country,
he called in the Knights of the Cross, who were then
by the saracens driven out of syria. Unto these he surrendred
the Country of Culm, under condition, that such
places as by their help should be conquered in Prussia,
should be divided betwixt them; which afterwards
proved to be the occasion of great Wars betwixt them
and Poland. 
        To Lescus succeeded his son Boleslaus,
         B•lesiaus V. surnamed the
Chast,
         1226. under whose Reign the Tartars committed prodigious
Barbarities in Poland, and from thence made an
In-road into silesia, where in a Battel fought near Lignitz,
they slew so many of the Inhabitants, that they filled
nine great sacks with the Ears which they had cut off. 
His Reign was besides this full of intestine Troubles. 
Him succeeded his Cousin Lescus,
         L•scus VI. 1279. surnamed the Black,
who was very Fortunate in his Wars with the Russians
and Lithuanians: he also quite rooted out the Jazygians,
which then inhabited Podolia, but the Civil Commotions
and frequent Incursions of the Tartars, occasioned
great Disturbances in the Kingdom. He died in
the year 1289. § 6. After the Death of Lescus, there were great Contests
in Poland concerning the Regency;Premislus till at last Premissus,
Lord of Great Poland got the upper hand;1291. who also reassumed
the Title of King, which the Regents of Poland
had not used during the space of 200 years; ever since
that the Pope, after the banishment of Boleslaus the
Hardy, had forbid them to choose a King of Poland. And

the succeeding Princes were not very ambitious of that
Title, because the Country was divided among several
Persons. But Premislus did think himself powerful enough
to make use of it. He was murthered by some
Brandenburgh Emissaries, after he had reigned but seven
Months. Ʋladisl. III. After him was elected Ʋladislaus Locticus, or
Cubitalis, who did not stile himself King, but only Heir
of Poland. But he having been deposed for Maleadministration,
Wenceslaus King of Bohemia was elected
in his stead. 1300. But after his Death, which happened in
the Year 1309. Locticus was restored, who waged
great Wars against the Knights of the Cross, whom he
at last vanquished in a great Battel. Under his Reign the
Dukes of silesia who were Vassals of Poland, submitted
themselves to the Crown of Bohemia. He died in the
Year 1333. Casimir III. Him succeeded his son Casimir the Great,
who having subdued all Russia, united it to the Kingdom
of Poland, so that it should enjoy the same Laws and
Liberties. He also first introduced the Magdeburgh Laws
and Constitutions into Poland, and the Duke of Masuria
did then first submit himself as a Vassal to the Crown of
Poland. He died in the Year 1370. leaving no Issue behind
him; and by his Death the Male-Race of Piastus
lost the Crown of Poland. 
        § 7. After Casimir the Crown of Poland was devolved
to Lewis King of Hungary,
         Lewis. the sister's son of Casimir:
The Poles were not well satisfied with him, because
he favoured the Hungarians too much. He died
in the Year 1382. sigismund King of Hungary would
fain have succeed him in Poland, but the Poles refused
him. some proposed Zicmovitus the Duke of Masuria,
but Hedwig the Daughter of King Lewis, for whom the
Poles would by all means reserve the Crown of Poland,
would not accept of him for her Husband. At last the
Poles Crowned the above-mentioned Hedwig, and married
her to Jagello Duke of Lithuania,
         Jagello, or 
           Ʋla•isl. IV. 
          under Condition
that he and his subjects should turn Christians, and Lithuania
should be united to Poland in one body. How Lithuania was united o Poland. The
first Condition was performed immediately, for he was
baptized, and called Ʋladislaus IV. But the performance
of the second Article was delayed by the Kings of Poland
         
for a considerable time after, under pretence that the Lithunians
were not well satisfied in this Point, but in effect,
because they were unwilling to surrender their right of
succession to the Dukedom of Lithuania; till at last this
Union was perfected under the Reign of King sigismundus
Augustus. This Jagello defeated the Knights of the Cross
in a memorable Battel, where 50000 Men having been
slain, he took from them a great many Cities in Prussia,
but they afterwards recovered themselves. He died in
the Year 1434. Ʋladisl. V. 
          Him succeeded his son Ʋladislaus V. 
who also afterwards was made King of Hungary, where
he was engaged in a War against the Turks. In this War
John Humades first defeated the Turks near the River
Morava, and Ʋladislaus so beat them upon the Frontiers
of Macedonia, that they were forced to make a
Truce for Ten Years. But upon the perswasions of the
Pope, who sent the Cardinal Julian, to absolve the
King from his Oath, this Truce was broken; and not
long after that memorable Battel was fought near Varna,
where the King himself was killed. 1445. This Defeat was
very shameful and prejudicial to the Christians. § 8. Casimir IV. 
          In his stead Casimir was made King of Poland:
A great part of Prussia, which was weary of the Government
of the Knights of the Cross, did surrender it
self under his Protection: This occasioned a heavy War
betwixt them and the Poles, which having been carried
on a great while with dubious success, a Peace was at
last concluded by the mediation of the Pope; by Vertue
of which, the Poles got Pomerellia, Culm, Marienburgh,
stum and Elbing, the rest remaining under the jurisdiction
of the Knights of the Cross, under Condition, that
the Master of that Order should be a Vassal of Poland,
and a Duke and senator of that Kingdom. Much about
the same time, the Duke of Vallachia, did submit himself
as a Vassal to the Crown of Poland. Under the
Reign of this King, the Deputies of the Provinces first
appeared at the Dyets of the Kingdom. Ʋladislaus the
son of this Casimir was made King of Bohemia, and
afterwards also of Hungary, tho' his own Brother John
Albert did contend with him for the latter, but being
soundly beaten, was obliged to desist from his Pretensions. 

         Casimir died in the Year 1492. Him succeeded
his son John Albert,
         John Albert. who received a signal overthrow
in Vallachia from the Turks and rebellious Vallachians. 
The Turks also fell into Poland, but by a sudden great
Frost a great many Thousands of them were starved to
Death. Under the Reign of this King, the Dukedom
of Plotzk•
          in the Country of Masovia was united to Poland. 
He died in the Year 1501. Whom succeeded
his Brother Alexander,
         Alexander. sigismund. but he did not Reign longer
than till the Year 1506. Whom succeeded sigismund
one of the most Famous Princes of his time. This
King was engaged in three several Wars against the Muscovites,
wherein the Poles always were Victorious in the
Field, but the Muscovites who had got smolensko by
Treachery, kept the possession of that place. The War
which he waged with the Knights of the Cross in Prussia,
at last composed under these Conditions; that Albert
Marquess of Brandenburgh, who was then Master of
that Order, should receive the Eastern parts of Prussia
as a hereditary Fief from the King, and should acknowledge
himself hereafter a Vassal of the Crown of Poland. 
Under his Reign also the whole Country of Masovia was
re-united to the Crown of Poland. He also fought very
successfully against the Vallachians, and died in the Year
1548. sigismund is Augustus. leaving for his successour his son sigismundus
Augustus. Under his Reign Livonia submitted it self to
Poland, as being not able to defend it self against the
Muscovites, who already had taken Dorpt, Felin, and several
other places. In this publick Consternation Estlad and
Reval did surrender themselves to Erick King of swedeland▪
         
But the Archbishop of Riga, and the Master of
the Teutonick Order, did seek for Protection of the
King of Poland, which he would not grant them upon
any other terms, than that they should submit themselves
to the Crown of Poland. Whereupon the Master of the
Order having abdicated himself, surrendred the Castle
of Riga and some other places to the Poles. And he in
recompence of his Loss was made Duke of Curland and
semigall. This occasioned a War betwixt the Poles and
Muscovites, wherein these took from the former Plotzk•. 
This King died without Children,1552. and by his Death the
Male Race of the Jagellonick Family was quite extinguished. 
§ 9. After his Death there were great Contentions
in Poland concerning the Election of a new King, and at
last by the majority of Votes,Henry of Val••s Duke of Anjou. 1574. 
         Henry Duke of Anjou,
Brother of Charles IX. King of France, was declared
King of Poland, who arriving there was crowned in the
same Year. But he had scarce been four Monthsin Poland,
when having Notice that his Brother the King of
France was dead, he in the Night time, and in a thick
Fog, for fear the Poles should detain him, relinquished
Poland, and taking his way through Austria and Italy into
France, took Possession of that Kingdom. The Poles
being extreamly vexed at this Affront, were for electing
a new King. A great many were for Maximilian of
Austria,
         steph. Batori. but stephen Batori Prince of Transylvania having
been declared King by the plurality of Votes, quickly
came into Poland, and excluded Maximilian by marrying
Anna the sister of sigismundus Augustus. This
King reduced the City of Dantzick, which had sided
with Maximilian to obedience. Afterwards he fell upon
the Muscovites, taking from them Plotzko and the
neighbouring Countries. At last he made Peace with
the Muscovites, under this Condition, that they should
resign to him the whole Country of Livonia, in lieu of
which he would restore to them such places as, he had
taken from them in Muscovy. This King adorned the
Kingdom with wholesome Constitutions, and established
the Militia of Horse, which souldiers being paid out of
the fourth part of the Royal Revenues, are commonly
called the Quartians; these he disposed upon the Frontiers
to defend the same against the Incursions of the Tartars. 
By this means that Tract of Land which from Bar, Bracklavia
and Kiovia, extends it self betwixt the two Rivers
of the Dniester and the Borysthenes, as far as to the Black
sea, was filled with populous Cities and Towns, which
is now called the Ʋkraine, it having been formerly a desolate
Country. He also put into a good Order and Discipline
the Cosacks,
         Th•
           Cosacks. who served for Foot souldiers, giving
to them Techtimorovia, situated on the River Borysthenes,
which they made afterwards their Magazine, and
the place of Residence of their Governours. Before
this time the Cosacks were only a wild and barbarous

sort of Rabble, who were gathered out of the Polish
Russia, and having settled themselves in the Island of
the River Borysthenes beneath Kiovia, lived upon Robbing
and Plunder. These Cosacks, after they were brought
into good Discipline by this King stephen, have been for
a considerable time serviceable to the Crown of Poland,
not only against the Incursions of the Tartars, but also
by their cruising into the Black sea, have done great
Mischief to the Turks. For they have had Courage
enough to ransack the Cities of Trebisond and sinope, nay,
even the suburbs of Constantinople with other places. 
This brave King, whilst he was making Preparations against
the Turks, died in the Year 1586. § 10. sigism. III. 
          After his Death, sigismund son to John King of
swedeland was made King of Poland, who had this Advantage,
that his Mother Catherine had been sister of
sigismundus Augustus, and so consequently was descended
from the Jagellonick Race. some of the Poles proclaimed
Maximilian their King, but he coming with
some Forces to take Possession of the Kingdom, was
beaten and taken Prisoner, and before he obtained his
Liberty, was obliged to renounce his Title to that Crown. 
After the Death of John King of sweden,
         1592. 
         sigismund
went in the Year next following into swedeland, where
he was Crowned King of sweden. But having afterwards
lost that Crown, it occasioned a War betwixt Poland
and sweden. In the beginning of this War, Charles IX. 
King of sweden took a great many places from the Poles
in Livonia, which were however most of them afterwards
retaken by the Polish General and Chancellour
Zamoiski: Besides this,1605. the King of sweden was vanquished
in a great Battel fought near Kirckholm and Riga,
where he narrowly escaped himself. But some intestine
Divisions being arisen betwixt the King and the Nobility
of Poland, King Charles got an opportunity to recover
himself. In the mean time there was a War kindled betwixt
the Muscovites and Poles by the following occasion:Th• occasion of he War between Poland and M•sc•vy. 
         
There was a certain Person in Poland who pretended
that he was Demetrius the son of John Basilowitz, Grand
Duke of Muscovy, and that he was to have been murthered

by the Order of Boris Gudenow, who hoped
thereby to obtain the succession in the Empire after
the Death of Theodore the eldest son of the said John
Basilowitz, but that another had been killed in his stead. 
This Man having found great Encouragement from George
Mniszeck the Vayvod of sendemir, promised to marry his
Daughter. Wherefore this Vayvod with the Assistance
of some other Polish Lords having gathered an Army
that marched with Demetrius into Muscovy: And the
Grand Duke Boris Gudenow happening to die suddenly
soon after,1605. 
         Demetrius was well received by the Russians;
and having vanquished such as pretended to oppose him,
he came up to the City of Muscovy, where he was proclaimed
Grand Duke: But he quickly made himself odious
to the Muscovites, they suspecting him to be an
Impostor, but did however hide their resentments till
the arrival of the Polish Bride. In the mean while the
Muscovites (under the Conduct of those of suski, who
were by their Mother's side descended from the Family
of the Grand Dukes) had under-hand got together about
20000 Men. 1606. These at the time when the Nuptials were
celebrating with great Pomp, raised a Tumult, attacked
the Castle, and cut to pieces Demetrius and a great many
Poles who were come along with the Bride, tho' some
of the chiefest defended themselves bravely and escaped
their Fury. Then Basilius suski was proclaimed Great Duke in the
publick Market place,Basil. great Duke of Muscovy. 
          who caused there the Body of Demetrius
to be exposed to publick view, but he being extreamly
defaced by his Wounds, his Face could not be
discerned by the multitude. Immediatly after, a rumor
was spread abroad, that Demetrius was escaped, and another
appeared soon after, who pretended to be the
same Demetrius. Whether it was the same or not, is not
yet determined; this is certain that the Poles did acknowledge
him as such, they being very desirous to revenge
the former Affront and the Death of their Friends. 
This Old or New Demetrius did march with a great
Army composed of Poles and Cosacks into Muscovy,
         1086. where
he several times beat suski, whom he obliged to set at
Liberty the captive Bride, and to beg the King of Poland
to recal his subjects. But the Bride having acknowledged

this Demetrius for her Husband, he got a great
part both in Muscovy and Poland that sided with him, and
would quickly have ruined suski, if he had not been
succoured by the King of sweden who sent Pontus de la
Gardie with some Forces to his Assistance. sigismund also took hold of this Opportunity,sigismund makes his a 〈…〉 of these Troubles in Muscovy. 1609. to try
whether he could at least recover smolensko and severia
from the Muscovites. Wherefore he besieged smolensko
in the Year 1609. which however he could not make
himself Master of till the Year 1611. when he took it
by storm. In the mean time, the Poles which had hitherto
sided with Demetrius, were recalled by sigismund,
who did think it not convenient that so considerable a
part of his Forces should be under the Command of another. 
By the removal of these Forces, suski had leisure
given him to recollect himself, and with the Auxilaries
sent him out of swedeland, he marched against the
Poles who had besieged smolensko,
         1610. but was defeated by
the Poles near Clusin. By this overthrow the Affairs of
the Muscovites were again put into a very dangerous
Condition. Wherefore they took this Resolution to avoid
the Danger which threatened them from the Polish
side. They deposed suski, who by his Misfortunes was
become odious to them, and offered the Crown of Muscovy
to Ʋladislaus the Prince of Poland. 
         The Policy o• the Musc•vites. 
          By this means
they hoped at one stroak to ruin Demetrius, and to be
reconciled to the Poles, in hopes, that they might easily
meet with an Opportunity hereafter, when they had once
rid themselves of the present Danger, to rid themselves
also of the Prince of Poland. And this Project succeeed
very well, for the Polish Troops immediatly left the
Party of Demetrius; suski was surrendred to the Poles,
who promised to the Muscovites, what had sworn before
Allegiance to Ʋladislaus, that he should appear in Person
in Muscovy in the Year 1610. But King sigismund by
the perswasions of some of his Friends refused this offer,
thinking it more for his purpose to Conquer Muscovy by
Force of Arms; which Opportunity, however, he missed
of, since he did not immediatly march towards the City
of Muscovy,
         The Oversight of sigismund. 
          which he might have taken at the first Assault. 
But the Muscovites having discovered the Design
of the Poles, did unanimously revolt from Ʋladislaus,
         
especially since they had in the mean while been rid of
Demetrius, who had been murthered by the Tartars that
were his Gaurds. They therefore attacked the Polish
Garrison in the City of Muscovy, which consisted of seven
Thousand Men, but these defended themselves bravely;
and besides this, set Fire to the whole City, which before
had 180000 Houses, where abundance of People were
burned. Nevertheless the Muscovites recovered themselves
and besieged the Polish Garrison in the Castle of
Muscovy. If King sigismund immediatly after the taking
of smolensko, had sent them Relief, as he easily might
have done, he questionless might have established his Affairs
in Muscovy. But he marching back with his Army
into Poland, and sending to their Relief neither Men
nor Money, the Garrison who had before plundered the
Treasury of the Great Duke, to the number of 7000. 
leaving some to Guard the Castle, fought their way
through the Muscovites, and came to King sigismund to
demand their Pay. And tho' sigismund began to apply
himself in good earnest to re-establish his Affairs in Muscovy,
yet all his Designs were by the jealousie which
reigned betwixt the Generals so long delayed, till the
Poles who had the Gaurd of the Castle of the City of
Muscovy, were forced by Famine to surrender it. Thus
all was lost in Muscovy; for sigismund, who was the more
troubled at it, because he had made an account by the
Conquest of Muscovy, to open his way into swedeland. 
        Besides this,The Poles defeated in Moldavia. 
          the Poles sustained in the same Year a considerable
Loss in Moldavia. Prince Ʋladislaus did undertake
an Expedition into Muscovy, but to no great purpose,
wherefore he made a Truce with them for fourteen
Years,1617. wherein it was agreed, that the Poles in the
mean time should keep in their Possession the Dukedom
of severia, Zernigo and Novogrod, which they had taken
during these Troubles in Muscovy. In the mean time
George Farenbach did surrender several places in Livonia
to the King of sweden, Gustavus Adolphus, but it was suspected
that he intended to betray the King; for soon
after, the same Farenbach was reconciled to King
sigismund, unto whom he restored all the places, except
Pernau. 
        
In the Year 1620. A War betwixt the Poles and Turks. 
          the Poles were engaged in a War
against the Turks, that were as 'tis supposed, stirred up
by Betlem Gabor Prince of Transylvania; for sigismund
having assisted the Emperour against him, Betlem Gabor
was for making them a Diversion by the help of the
Turks. The Turks therefore entred Moldavia with an
Intention to banish that Duke, who sided with the Poles. 
the Polish General Zolkieuski coming to the Assistance
of the Duke of Moldavia advanced too far into the Country,
and as he was marching back, was totally routed
and himself slain upon the Place. In the Year next following
the Turks marched with their whole Froces against
Poland, who were met by the Poles near Chocim
under the Command of Prince Ʋladislaus. The Polish
Army was about 65000 strong, but the Turks 392000
Men, commanded by the Turkish Emperour Osman in
Person. The Turks did attempt three times to take the
Polish Camp by storm, but were as often repulsed with
great Loss. But the Poles in the mean while suffered extreamly
for want of Ammunition and Provisions, and
were mightily weakened by sicknesses and the Mortahty
among their Horses. Nevertheless the Turkish Emperour
made a very honourable Peace with them, after
he had lost 60000 Men, in these several storms made
upon their Camp, and a greater Number in his march
back to Constantinople. 
        In the mean time King Gustavus Adolphus falling into
Livonia,
         1621. took the City of Riga without any great Resistance. The Invasiof Gustavus Adolp• us. 
And the rest of Livonia, except Dunneburgh was
Conquered by the swedes in the Year 1625. 1625. King Gustavous entred Prussia with an Army in the Year 1626. 
where he took the Cities of Marienburgh and Elbing,
besides some other Places. This War was thus carried
on without any General Engagement till the Year 1629. 
when Hans Wrangel the swedish General defeated the
Poles near Gorzno. Then the Emperour sent some Forces
to the Assistance of the Poles, who in a Battel fought
near stum, were very near having made King Gustavus
their Prisoner. But the Polish Affairs being after
this Battel fallen into great Confusion, a Truce was concluded
by the mediation of France and England till the
Year 1634. the swedes being in the mean while to keep

in their Possession Elbing, Memel, Braunsberg, Pill•u,
and what else they had taken in Livonia. sigismund
died in the Year 1632. § 11. Ʋladis. IV. 
          After his Death his son Ʋladislaus IV. was
declared King, who in the Year next following, obtained
a signal Victory over the Muscovites that had besieged
smolensko; for he not only forced them to raise the
siege, but also brought the Muscovite Army into such
streights, that they were forced to surrender themselves. 
And the Turks who would have made a Diversion to
him,1634. were also bravely repulsed. At last Ʋladislaus
made a very advantageous Peace on his side with the
Muscovites, by vertue of which these renounced all their
Pretensions upon the two large Dukedoms of smolensko
and Ozernichow. This begot such a Terrour among the
Turks, that they freely made him Restitution for the
Damages sustained in their last In-road, having also
caused the Bashaw who commanded these Forces,1635. to be
strangled. The Truce with sweden was prolonged at
stumdorf in Prussia, for 26 Years, where the places possessed
before by the swedes in Prussia were restored to
the Poles, because the swedish Affairs in Germany were
then after the Battel of Norlingen in a very ill Condition,
and besides this, the English and Dutch were extreamly
dissatisfied with the Tolls that were paid in Prussia. 
        In the Year 1637. The Cause of the War with the Cosacks. 
          the Foundation was laid of the
War with the Cosacks, which has brought unspeakable
Mischiefs upon the Poles. The business happened thus:
As the number of the Cosacks was greatly encreased by
the great number of Boors, which frequently ran into
them, so the great Men in Poland had purchased great
Estates in the Ʋkraine, who were of Opinion, that their
Revenues would be considerably encreased, if the Liberty
of the Cosacks were reduced into more narrow bounds. 
Wherefore they having advised the King, that they
ought to be more restrained for the future; the Polish
General Konicepoliski, did cause the Fortress of Hudack
to be built, just at a point where the River of Zwamer
falls into the Dnieper or Borysthenes. The Cosacks endeavoured
to prevent the perfecting of this Work by force,
but being routed by the Poles, were obliged to surrender

their General Pauluck and some of their Chief Men among
them, who were all, notwithstanding a Pardon
was promised them before hand, beheaded. Besides
this, it was decreed in the Dyet, that all their former
Priviledges and the Fortress of Techtimorovia should be
taken from them, and that in their stead, a new body
of Militia should be settled there. To put this Decree
in execution, the Polish Army marched into the Ʋkraine,
against which, the Cosacks fought with great bravery,
promising nevertheless, that they would be faithful to
the Crown of Polana, if their ancient Priviledges were
confirmed to them, which the Poles did promise them,
bur did not perform; nay, did even treat some of them
very ill. For among other oppressive Methods, they took
also from them some of their Greek Churches. Their
General Chmielinski was also grosly Affronted, for which
he could obtain no satisfaction. For the King having
granted him a Priviledge to build some Mills, a certain
Gentleman whose Name was Jarinski, burnt the same,
having also ravished his Wife, and afterwards killed both
her and her son. § 12. John Casimir. In the mean time Ʋladislaus died, whom succeeded
his Brother John Casimir. 
         1647. Then Chmielinski to
revenge himself, stirred up the Cosacks against the Poles,
who with Burning, Plundering and Ravishing, did what
Mischief they could to the Polish Nobility. And the senators
having desired the King to march out into the
Field against them, they were answered by him, That
they ought not to have burnt down their Mills. Whereat
the Poles being extreamly dissatisfied brought together
an Army of 50000 Men, which being defeated by the
Cosacks,
         The Poles defeated by •he Cos•••s. 
          there were killed 10000 upon the spot, and besides
this, they took the City of Kiovia. To revenge
this Affront, the Poles summoned the seventh Man
throughout the whole Kingdom, and marched against the
Cosacks without the Consent of the King, but were again
miserably beaten by them. But Chmielinski celebrating
the Nuptials of his son with the Daughter of the Prince
of Vallachia, the Poles surprised the Cosacks thereabouts,
plundered the City, and took the Grecian Patriarch prisoner. 
The Cosacks then sent to the King to know whether

this had been done by his Authority; and the King
having answered▪ No, but that it had been done by the
Nobility to take revenge of the Cosacks; these joined
with the Tartars and fell into Poland; against these the
King went in Person into the Field at the Head of the
Nobility, and defeated them in a Battel▪ but the King
having afterwards made an Agreement with them, the
Nobility was greatly discontented with the King's proceedings,
alledging, that the King had granted too much
to the Cosacks. 
        Whilst the Jealousies reigned in Poland,
         The Muscovites join w•th the C•sacks. 
          the Muscovites
fell into Poland, and having brought the Cosacks over to
their Party, besieged smolensko, which they took in the
Year next following; and having ravaged every where
in Lithuania,
         1653. they took Wilea and some other Cities, where
they committed great Barbarities. In the Year 1655. The King of sweden invades Poland. 
          another storm threatened the Poles. 
For Charles Gustavus King of swedeland having with an
Army of chosen Men entred that Kingdom, first Conquered
great Poland and Masovia, and afterwards the
lesser Poland, with the capital City Cracovia, from whence
he marched into Prussia, where almost all the Cities surrendred
themselves, except Dantzick, where were at first
a great many Citizens that favoured the swedes, but by
the perswasions of some Ministers, were kept in Obedience
to Poland. The Resistance which was made by
this one City, was the main Reason why all the Advantages
got by the swedes proved fruitless at last, and
that they could not maintain themselves in Prussia, notwithstanding
that not only the whole Militia of Poland,
and that part of Lithuania which was not under the subjection
of the Muscovites, had submitted themselves to the
swedish Protection, but also, that King John Casimir himself
fled into silesia. For the Poles having recollected themselves
after the first Constemation was over, and being
joined by the Tartars, fell upon such of the swedish Forces
as were dispersed up and down the Country. The
Lithuanians also revolted, and killed all the swedes that
were in Winter Quarters with them. King Charles
Gustavus also had greatly weakened his Army, not only
by the great March towards Jeroslavia, but also Czarneski,
the Polish General did often with his Light-Horse fall upon

on the Rear of the Army, and did considerable Mischief. 
In the mean while the Poles also had retaken
Warsovia, where they had made the swedish Governour
Wittenbergh and some other great Officers Prisoners,
contrary to the Articles made at the surrendry
of the Place. And tho' King Charles Gustavus having
been joined before by the Elector of Brandenburgh's
Forces did vanquish the Poles and Tartars in a memorable
Battel which lasted three Days, and was fought near
Warsovia,
         The Battel of Warsaw. 
          yet all the Princes of Europe began to look
about them, and to consult about a Diversion to be made
sweden. The Muscovites fell into Livonia, where they
besieged Riga, but to no purpose. The Hollanders did
give plainly to understand, that they were not willing
that Prussia should come under the subjection of swedeland. 
And the Danes also began to be in motion. On
the other hand,Ragozi Prince of Transylvania invades Poland. 
         Ragozi Prince of Transylvania entred Poland
with an Army, to try whether perhaps he could
obtain that Crown for himself. But the King of sweden
being obliged to march out of Poland against the
Danes, Ragozi made a bad Market of it; for before he
could reach his own Country, he was totally routed,
and oliged to make a shameful accord with the Poles. 
Which misfortune however he might have avoided, if
he, according to the advice of the King of sweden, who
promised to keep the Poles so long in play, till he was
out of danger, would have taken his march directly
over Brescie, Pinsk, and so further towards his own
Frontiers. But Ragozi would by all means take his way
near Cracaw. Then the Poles retook Cracaw and Thorn,
and chased the swedes out of Curland, who had before
taken the Duke of that name Prisoner. The Poles also
besieged Riga, but were beaten from thence by the
swedish General Helmfeld. 
         1606. And tho the Poles by the
Peace made at Oliva recovered all Prussia again, yet
were they obliged to renounce all their pretensions upon
Livonia, and to leave the Muscovites in the possession of
smolensko, severia and Kiovia. Neither could they
appease the Cosacks, some of them having put themselves
under the protection of the Muscovites, some under
the Turks, whereby they shewed the way to the
Turks into Poland. Neither could the King put an end

to the intestine divisions and jealousies, wherefore at last
tired with these troubles John Casimir resigned the
Crown, and living a retired life in France in the Abby
of st. Germain, he there dyed a few years after. §. 13. There being now left none of the Royal Family
in Poland, several Foreigners pretended to the
Crown. But at last a Piastus, whose name was
Michael Witsnowizki,
         Michael Witsnowizki was declared King, chiefly by
the Votes of the lesser Nobility. His short Reign
was full of intestine commotions,1670. and the Turks in the
mean while did not cease to do considerable mischief in
Poland; having in the year 1672. taken Caminieck in
Podolia, which Fortress having been formerly thought
impregnable, serves them now for a door, through
which they may enter Poland at pleasure. A Peace
was then concluded with the Turks, by vertue of which
the said Fortress remained in the possession of the Turks,
the Poles also having promised to pay to the Turks a
yearly Tribute. This King dyed in the year 1673. In
whose stead in the year next following the Polish General
John sobieski was made King of Poland,
         John sobieski. he having
in the year before attacked the Turks in their Camp
with such success, that of 32000 Men scarce 1500
escaped alive. He renewed the War with the Turks,
but concluded a Peace with them in the year 1676. by
vertue of which the Turks kept the Fortress of Caminieck,
but remitted the yearly Tribute to the Poles. He
being a Man of great capacity, it is hoped that he may
prove a good King of Poland. 
        §. 14. It is to be considered concerning the Polish Nation,T•e Genius of this Nation. 
that whosoever is not a Nobleman in Poland, is
esteemed a Boor. For the Inhabitants of the Cities are very
little regarded, and the Tradesmen are most Foreigners. 
But the Boors are esteemed nor used no better than
slaves, being also very raw and barbarous, both in their
Life and Conversation, wherefore when we talk of the
Poles, thereby ought only to be understood the Nobility. 
They are therefore commonly downright and honest,
very seldom given to the art of dissembling; they are of
a very generous spirit, and expect a great deal of respect. 

And if you give them as much respect as they
pretend to, they are no less courteous, and will willingly
pay a respect again to you; and their words and behaviour
are full of Pomp and Ceremony. They are
very liberal, or rather profuse; and not given to be parsimonious,
tho they should want the next day. This
Nation also is very fierce and extravagant, much inclined
to an uncountroled liberty, or rather licentiousness
and petulancy. Wherefore Plots and Conspiracies
against their Kings are frequent among them, whose
Actions they canvase with a great deal of freedom, being
always jealous of the least point of their Liberty. 
They do not want courage, but they are more fit to
act with a sudden heat, than to endure long the fatigues
of War. And because the Nobles only apply themselves
to the War, who never serve but on Horseback,
and the rest of the Inhabitants are of no great spirit,
their infantry gathered out of the Natives is not worth
much, wherefore they are obliged in their stead to make
use of Foreigners listed into their service, or of the
Cosacks, who are courageous and active. §. 15. This Country is of a vast extent,The Nature of the soil, &c. Its Commodities. and very
Fertile in general, fit both for Tillage and Pasture, or
breeding of Cattel. For Holland draws most of its
Corn out of Poland, and the Polish Oxen are sent in
great numbers into Germany. The Polish Wool also is
in good esteem abroad. Poland abounds with good
Horses. Lituania produces abundance of Hony, which
is most consumed by the Inhabitants, who make Mead
of it; the rest is exported, as likewise abundance of
Wax, Hemp, Flax, Leather, Pot-aslies, salt, Wood,
and the like. But on the contrary the Commodities
which are imported here are silk, woollen stuffs and
Cloaths, Tapestries, sables, Hungarian and spanish
Wines, abundance of spice, which they use in great
quantity in their Dyet. If the Poles were addicted in
the least to good Husbandry, and would apply themselves
a little to Manufactures, the Commodities fit for
exportation here, would much surpass those which need
be imported. Poland is very populous and full of Towns and Villages. 
some have computed that the King and the Nobility
have in their possession 90000 Cities and Villages,
the Bishops and Canons 100550, the rest of the Clergy,
Monks and Nuns, 60950. Which in all amounts
to the number of 250950 Towns and Villages. Yet I
will not be answerable for this account. §. 16. The strength of the Kingdom. The chief strength of this Kingdom consists
in the Nobility. The Poles have formerly given
out that they could raise 250000 Horse, some say
200000, out of the Nobility. Which seems to be
a little largely spoken, except you would reckon among
them their servants. This is certain that in no Kingdom
of Europe there is so great a number of Nobles. 
They also may find a way to raise a proportionable Infantry
out of the Cosacks. And if they will stretch a
little their Purses, they are able enough to raise sufficient
for the maintaining of a great Army. Their weakness. But here is
the mischief, that the King cannot levy any extraordinary
Taxes, without the consent of the Nobility, and
both the Clergy and the Nobility are very backward
in paying of any Taxes, or at least grow quickly aweary
of them, except it be in case of the highest necessity. 
And this is the reason why the King of Poland cannot
carry on a War long with vigour. Besides this when
the Nobles are s••moned to appear in Arms, they come
slowly into th• 
         •ield, and are not easily kept under
Discipline. The Polish Armies have also this inconveniency
in them, that where 10000 fighting Men are,
at least five times the number of servants and idle Fellows
follow the Camp, which proves a destruction to
their own Country, and occasions scarcity of Provisions
both for Men and Horse. §. 17. Concerning their Form of Government;Their form of Government. it
is to be observed that the Poles live under one Head,
who bears the Title, and lives in the splendour becoming
a King; but if you consider his Power, which
is circumscribed within very narrow bounds, he is in
effect no more than the Prime or Chief Regent in a
Free Commonwealth. This King is always chosen by

a free Election, where every Noble Man there present
has his Vote; and tho the Poles have been always inclined
to keep to the Royal Race, yet have they never
been for declaring a successour during the life of the
present King, but have always expected the vacancy of
the Throne, as being of opinion, that this time is the
most proper to abolish such Abuses as perhaps are crept
in under the former Reign, and to prevent all means
which may prove prejudicial afterwards to their Liberties. 
But, that, during this Vacancy, all disorders
may be prevented, Justice is then exercised with more
severity than at other times: the Archbishop of Guiesen,
who is the Primate of Poland, being in the mean while
the Regent, or as it were Interrex of the Kingdom. 
The Poles have had for a considerable time this Maxim,
that they would rather choose a King out of a Foreign
Princely Family, than out of their own Nobility; as
being of Opinion that thereby the equality among the
Nobility may be better preserved; for a Foreigner is no
more engaged to one than to another; whereas a Native
always prefers his Kindred and Relations before the
rest: and this Rule they have observed ever since the
time of Jagello, who being a Lituanian, united Lituania
with Poland. But they had not the same good fortune
with sigismund King of sweden, partly because
the situation of these two Kingdoms is such: that both
cannot well be governed by one King; partly because
they were thereby engaged in a heavy War against
swedeland, which else might easily have been avoided;
but they have been always very careful not to take their
Kings out of the House of Austria, fearing lest they
should be treated like the Hungarians and Bohemians. 
In the two last Elections they have chosen two Kings
out of their own Nobility, and whether thereby these
Factions which have hitherto been predominant in that
Kingdom, can be suppressed, time will shew. This
Elective King has a great Revenue out of the Lands
belonging to the Crown,The Revenues of the King. and has the sole power to
dispose of all vacant Offices, Dignities and Benefices;
but he cannot make new Laws, begin a War▪ impose
new Taxes, or undertake any other Matters of great
moment, without the consent of the Estates. The Estates

in Poland are composed of the Bishops and some
Abbots,The Estates of the Kingdom. of the Palatins or Vaywods, which are Governours
of the Provinces, of the Castellans or Governours
of Castles, and of the chief Officers of the
Kingdom; these compose the senate, which consisted
formerly of 150 Persons; besides these there are the Deputies
of the Nobility out of each District, who have
almost the same power which the Tribunes of the People
had at Rome; since one single person among them by
entring his Protest may annul a Decree at the Dyet;
and these Deputies use their Tongues very freely at the
Dyet, both against the King and his Ministers; from
whence it often happens that Matters are debated here
with great confusion, since by the capricious humour
of one Deputy the benefit of the whole Dyet is lost
at once; especially since a certain time of six weeks is
prefixed by the Laws for the holding of the Dyet,
which they rarely suffer to be Prorogued, and that not
but for a very few days; but they call this right of contradicting,
the soul of the Polish Liberty. The King
is also obliged to bestow all the vacant Benefices upon
the Nobility, and cannot reserve any for his own use,
or bestow them upon his Children without consent
of the Estates,Of the Administration of Justice. neither can he buy or take possession of
any Noblemens Lands. The King also is not Master of
the Judicial Courts; but there is a certain High Court
of Justice, the Judges whereof are Nobles: first Instituted
by King stephen Batori. These Judges are
changed every twelve months, and keep their session
six months in the year at Petricovia, and six months again
at Lublin, and from these no Appeal lies to the
King; except that some Cases of the greatest Consequence
are determined at the Dyet; but Cases belonging
to the King's Exchequer, or to his Revenues, are determined
by the King. The Poles are extreamly fond
of this form of Government, as being very suitable to
their natural fierce inclinations; yet the same is very
improper for any sudden and great undertaking; and
contributes not a little to the weakness of this vast
Kingdom, especially when the Nobility is refractory,
and jealous of the King. 
§. 18. Neighbours of Poland. 
          The Neighbours of Poland are on one side
the Germans, where there is an open Country upon the
Frontiers; and particularly Poland borders upon silesia,
and in one corner upon Hungary. 'Tis true that the
German Empire is much superiour in strenth to Poland,
         Germany. 
but the interest of both these Kingdoms is such, as not
to have any great occasion to differ with one another,
except Poland should perhaps join with such Estates in
Germany as would upon an occasion oppose the setting
up of an Absolute soveraignty in the Empire; and in
such a case the Poles would not want assistance either
from the German,
         The House of Austria in particular. or foreign Princes, that must concur
in the same Interest. The House of Austria alone is
not powerful enough to conquer Poland, or to maintain
a Country which is of so vast an extent and very
populous, and lying all upon a level is not secured by
any fortified places. If no body else should side with
Poland, the Turks themselves would not easily suffer that
the House of Austria should acquire such an advantage,
and the Turks are the fittest instruments to prevent it. 
But the House of Austria has often endeavoured, tho
the wisest among the Poles have always opposed it, to
unite the Kingdom of Poland to their Family by an
Election; but the Poles are conscious of the danger
which might accrue from this Union to their Liberty;
and besides this they are no great admirers of the Germans,
whose modesty and good Husbandry they commonly
despise. The Interest of Poland and Germany, with reference to the Turk. 
          But it is of great consequence to Poland,
that the Turks may not become quite Masters of the
Ʋpper Hungary, and much more that they do not get
footing in Moravia; since thereby they would open
their way into the very Heart of Poland. And on the
other hand it is the common Interest both of the House
Austria, and of all Germany, that the Turks may not
become Masters of Poland, since thereby they would
open their way into Germany. For the old saying of
Philip Melanchton, si Turca in Germaniam veniet, veniet
per Poloniam, if the Turks come into Germany
         ▪ they
will certainly come by the way of Poland, did not
arise from a Prophetick spirit, but has its good Reason
in Geography. And it seems to be the common Interest

of Poland, and the House of Austria, to keep up
a mutual good understanding, since they both cover
one anothers Frontiers, and Poland draws a great advantage
from its Oxen and salt which are sent into
Germany. And if Poland should engage it self in good
earnest against the House of Austria, it ought to be
jealous of the Moscovites, who may attack it behind,
except Moscovy were otherwise employed before. Poland
also may be troublesome to the House of Austria,
when that House is engaged in Wars against France,
sweden, or the Turks. Wherefore for a considerable
time the House of Austria has endeavoured by Marriages
to Allie Poland with their Family, and to gain
a considerable party in the senat. And France has followed
the same methods to draw Poland from the Interest
of the House of Austria; and the Poles having
been caressed by both parties have got no small advantage
by this Rivalship. Brandenburgh. 
         Brandenburgh also borders
on one side upon Poland, and tho he alone cannot hurt it
much, yet experience has taught us that in conjunction
with others he has been able to create great troubles to
the Poles. Tho on the other hand it is to be feared,
that perhaps upon a good occasion offered to the Poles
they may attempt to unite all Prussia to their Kingdom,
as the Elector of Brandenburgh knew how to
time it, when he obtained the soveraignty over it. 
As long as the differences betwixt Poland and sweden
were on foot,Denmark and sweden. 
         Denmark by making a diversion could be
very serviceable to Poland; but since the causes of these
differences are taken away, Poland need not make any
particular reflection upon Denmark swedeland and
Poland have all the reason in the world to cultivate a
mutual good understanding, since they may be very
serviceable to one another against the Moscovites. Poland
borders upon Moscovy by a great tract of Land,Moscovy. where
the Frontiers are common to both: These two Kingdoms
seem to be very near equal in strength▪ and tho
the Poles are better soldiers than the Moscovites, yet
has the Great Duke of Moscovy this advantage over
them, that he is absolute in his Dominions. And it is
of great consequence to either of them, which of these
two is in the possession of smolensko, to recover• which

the Poles ought to employ all their strength. For the rest,
these two states being both obliged to have a watchful
Eye over the Turks, can assist one another against them
in case of necessity. The Tartars are the most pernicious Neighbours of
Poland,
         The Tartars▪
          for they are a Nation living by depredations,
who surprise their Neighbours, and when they have
loaded themselves with spoils return Home again, where
you cannot be revenged of them, they being so nimble,
and having nothing worth taking from them. Wherefore
what ever mischief they do must be taken as if
you were bit by a Dog, except you can catch them in
the fact, and make them pay for it with their Heads. 
Against these the Country of Moldavia used to be a
Bulwark to Poland. 
         Moldavia. For through that Country the Tartars
have a direct passage into the Provinces of Poland,
which may be shut up against them by the help of that
Prince. Wherefore the Poles do much lament the loss
of this Dukedom, which having been formerly a Fief
of that Crown, tho that Duke pays also some Tribute
to the Turks, was brought in the year 1612. entirely
under the Turkish subjection. The Cosack•. The Cosacks also used to
be very serviceable against the Tartars, as living near
the Isthmus of the Taurick Chersonese, and therefore
were conveniently situated to cut of their retreat in
their return Home. But the Poles by their ill entertainment
have so exasperated the Cosacks, that since they
have done as much mischief to them, as formerly they
used to do good. And if the Poles should not be able by
fair means to bring over the Cosacks again to their side,
and these should either submit themselves to the Moscovites
or the Turks, or that these should quite root them
out, then Poland has got an incurable Ulcer on that
side, which may prove fatal to all the Neighbouring
Provinces of the Ʋkrain. 
        Lastly, the Turk is a dangerous Neighbour to Poland,
whose strength is much superior to that of Poland,
especially if the Poles are not assisted by the Cosacks,
or by some Foreign state. For, tho the Polish Cavalry
may not be inferiour to the Turks, yet cannot I see
which way they can bring into the Field such Forces as
may be equal to the Janisaries. Tho the negligence and

domestick divisions of the Poles have lately been the
chief inducements, which have drawn the Turks so deep
into Poland. There is not any thing which would
more conveniently secure the Poles against the Turks,
than if the Princes of Moldavia, Wallachia and Transylvania,
did belong to Poland, they being able to hinder
the passage of the Turks into Poland. But, because
the Poles have long ago lost this advantage, or rather
neglected it, it is their business now, to take care that
the Turks do not advance deeper into the Country. 
And to take away all pretensions of a War from the
Turks, it seems very necessary that the Poles, as much as
in them lies, do take care that the Cosacks do not in
time of Peace commit depredations upon the Turkish
subjects. For else the Turks are not to be blamed, if
endeavouring to root out these rapacious Birds they destroy
their Nest, and make the Ʋkrain a vast Wilderness. 
When Poland is engaged in a War with the Turks,
it may expect some subsides from the Pope. The House
of Austria, is able, by making a diversion to the Turks,
to give relief to Poland; but this House hitherto has
not been forward to attack the Turks, if these have not
been the first aggressors. The Moscovites also might
contribute somthing this way, if there were any hopes
of a true understanding betwixt these two Nations; but
as the case now stands, the Poles must chiefly rely upon
their own strength, and by the circumstances of their
own affairs be able to judg how far they ought to engage
themselves against the Turk. 
        CHAP. XI. Of MOsCOVT. §. 1. THE first origin of this Empire,The antient state of Russia. 
          and the
atchievements of their antient Princes
are very uncertain and obscure, since
what is to be found of this nature among
an ignorant people, is all very confused: so much
is certain, that this great Empire was formerly divided
into a great many petty Lordships, which afterwards
were united in one body. We will only relate in a few
words, that the Russians in the year 989. first embraced
the Christian Religion, at which time their Prince, Wolodomir
married Anne, the sister of the Grecian Emperour
Basilius Porphyrogenitus. In the year 1237. their
Prince George, was slain by Battus the King of the Tartars;
whereby the Russians being brought under the
subjection of the Tartars, their Princes were dependent
on them. After a long time they at last freed themselves
from this slavery under their Prince John,
         John. son of Basilius
the Blind, who began his Reign in the year 1450. 
Under his Reign Russia was first united into one considerable
Body, he having subdued most of these petty
Princes, which had divided Russia among them, especially
the Dukes of Tiver and of Great Novogrod, in
which City 'tis said he got a booty of three hundred
Cart loads of Gold and silver. This Prince built
Juanogrod, a Castle near Narva. 
        §. 2. Basilius. Him succeeded his son Basilius who took
Pleskeu, which was formerly a free City. From the
Poles he also took smolensko, but was soundly beaten by
the Astracan Tartars, who at the same time ransacked
the City of Moscovy. 
         John Basilewitz. Him succeeded his son John
Basilowitz, a cruel Tyrant,1533. who conquered the two
Kingdoms of the Tartars of Casan and Astracan, and

united them to Muscovy. He used the Livonians very
•atharously, having killed one Furstenbergh the Master
of the Order of Knighthood there, which was the occasion
that the City of Reval and whole Tethland surrendered
themselves to swedeland, and all the rest of Livonia to
Poland. He was at first victorious against the Poles, but
afterwards stephen Batori took from him Plotzko and several
other places. He died in the Year 1584. and unto
him succeeded his son Theodore Iuanowitz▪
         
         Theodore Iuanowitz. a very
simple Prince, against whom the swedes waged War about
Ingermanland. 
        § 3. This Theodore dying without Issue, his Brother
in Law Boris Guidenow did by his Intrigues obtain the
Empire,Boris Guidenow. but with very indifferent success, especially
after the supposed Demetrius began to contend with
him for it;1605. during which Troubles he died. His son
Theodore Borissowitz was proclaimed Great Duke of
Muscovy, but the Muscovites having afterwards for the
most part sided with the supposed Demetrius, he was taken
Prisoner and murthered, after he had but six Months
enjoyed the Title of Grand Duke. What became of
the supposed Demetrius,
         1606. and how Basilius Zuski took
upon him the Imperial Dignity, we have related before. 
To this Zuski, Charles IX. King of swedeland offered
his Assistance against the second supposed Demetrius,
which he at first refused to accept of. But afterwards,
when the other began to be too strong for him,
he earnestly desired the same, promising to surrender
to Charles as an acknowledgement, Kekholm. The King
sent to his Assistance Pontus de la Gardie with some
Thousand Men, who were very serviceable to the
Muscovites; nevertheless they made a great many Evasions,
refusing to deliver up these places which they had
promised before; wherefore the swedes took them by
Force, and thereby united Carelia and the rest of Ingermanland
with the Kingdom of sweden. How this
Basilius Zuski was delivered up to the Poles, how the
supposed Demetrius was slain, and Ʋladislaus Prince of
Poland made Duke of Muscovy, had been related before. 
§ 4. Michael Fadorowitz. At last Michael Fadorowitz son of the Patriarch
Theodore Mikitowitz, born of the Daughter of John
Basilowitz maintained himself in the Empire,1613. who having
concluded a Peace with sweden and Poland▪
          restored
tranquillity to the Muscovites. 
         1645. Him succeeded his son
Alexius Michaelowitz,
         Alexius Michaelowitz. who in the Year 1653. falling
upon the Poles, took from them smolensko and Kiovia,
and committed great depredations in Lithuania. 
         1656. And
having entred Livonia took Dorpt, Koenhusen and several
other places of less Note, but was obliged to raise the
siege of Riga with great Loss. And by vertue of a Peace
made with swedeland, was obliged to relinquish them all
again. In the Year 1669. one stephen Ratzin raised a
Rebellion against him, and having brought under him
Casan and Astracan, commited great depredations all
over the Country, but being taken Prisoner, received his
due reward, and the rest were reduced to their former
obedience. And because some of the Cosacks had submitted
themselves to his Protection, he was thereby
engaged in a War with the Turks, wherein he got but
little Advantage. He died in the 1675. Him succeeded
his son Theodore Alexowitz a young and sickly Prince,Theodore Alexowitz. 
of whom we can say nothing as yet. § 5. The Genius of this Nation. Of the Qualifications of the Muscovites, nothing
very praise-worthy can be said. For among them there
is no such Education as among most other European Nations,
Reading and Writing being the highest Degree
of Learning among them, and the Learning of their
Priests themselves does not go further than to be able
to read a Chapter out of the Bible, or to read a piece of
a sermon. They are also jealous, cruel and bloody-minded;
insupportably proud in prosperity, and dejected
and cowardly in adversity. Nevertheless they
have such an Opinion of their own Abilities and Merits,
that you can scarce ever pay them sufficient Respect. 
They are very fit for and cunning in the Trade of Usury,
but are of a servile Temper, and must be kept under
by severity. At all sorts of Games and sports their end
is with blows and fighting; so sticks and Whips are the
usual Instruments among them. They are of a strong

Constitution, able to undergo all sorts of Fatigues, even
Famine and Thirst. In Field-Fights and sieges they are
worth nothing, because they are soon brought into Confusion,
and are themselves of Opinion, that other Nations
are their Masters in this Point. But they defend a
Fortress to the utmost, not only because they are very
fit to undergo hardships and all sorts of misery, but also
because they know it is present death to them if they return
home after they have surrendred a Fortress by accord. 
Nevertheless, they do endeavour to bring their
soldiers under better Discipline, for which purpose, they
make use of a great many scotch and German Officers,
who are to instruct them in all manner of Exercises as
practised among other European Nations. But they do
not allow that the Muscovites should serve abroad and
learn themselves the perfection of Military Arts and Exercises,
because the Grand Duke stands in fear, that if
they should grow too knowing, they might be for making
Innovations at home. § 6. The Nature of the Country and Commodities. The Territories of the present Grand Duke of
Muscovy are of a very large extent, yet so▪ that a great
many parts are meer Wildernesses scarce inhabited at all. 
The Muscovites have at home great plenty of Corn,
Cattel, all sorts of Game, Fish, salt, Furrs and all other
Necessaries. They have a great many Commodities fit
for exportation, especially, Furrs and their precious sables,
which are esteemed at a high Rate among their
Neighbours, salt-Fish, Casiarr, Hides, Tallow, Wax,
Honey, Pot-ashes, soap, Hemp, and the like. But the
Commodities which are imported to them are silk, stuffs,
Gold, silver and Woollen Cloths, Tapestry, Pearls and
Precious stones, spices and Wines, but the latter not
in any great Quantities; Tobaco is now a prohibited
Commodity there. They keep it for a constant Custom
in their way of Trade, not to buy with ready Money,
but to exchange Commodities for Commodities, and it
is against the Constitutions of Muscovy, to export any
Coin. Their greatest Trade is at Archangel, which way
the English first found out in the Year 1553. But since
that time the Hollanders and Hamburgers have followed
their Example. Before that time, this Trade was carried

on by the way of Narva and Reval, but tho' this
was the shorter way, yet did the foreign Merchants not
care to be so much in subjection to the swedes and Danes. 
There is also a considerable Trade carried on with the
Persians upon the River of Wolga by the way of
Astracan. 
        § 7. Form of Government. The Form of Government here is an absolute
Monarchy; the Grand Duke, whom they call in their
Native Language Ozar, being not tied up to any Laws
or Rules, unto whom his subjects are obliged to pay
Obedience without reserve, so that they are no more
than slaves, which also sutes best with their natural Constitution. 
And therefore this absolute Power of the
Prince is a great addition to his strength,strength of the Country. since he cannot
only raise some Hundred Thousands of Men at the
first Command, but also has vast Riches and prodigious
Revenues. These do accrue to him, not only out of the
Taxes and income of so vast a Country, but also because
the Grand Duke himself has the monopoly of sables,
and if I am not much mistaken, also Farms out all
publick Inns, Taverns and Ale-houses himself, which amounts
to a prodigious Revenue in a Country where
the Nation is much addicted to drinking. He makes also
his Presents to Foreign Princes and Ambassadours in sables,
but receives in lieu of them Gold and silver. Besides
this, it is a common Custom with him, to set a
new stamp upon Crown Pieces, and to oblige his subjects
to take them for double the value: From whence
it cannot be supposed but that this Prince must lay up
vast Treasures. Muscovy also enjoys this Advantage before
other states, that it is not to be attacked on the
backside, because its Territories are on the North-East
side surrounded by a vast unnavigable sea, and vast
Wildernesses. § 8. Neighbours of Muscovy. The Persiant. 
          The Neighbours of Muscovy are on the Eastside,
the Persians. These two states cannot hurt one
another much, the Caspian sea, unaccessible Countries
and vast Wildernesses being their common Borders;
wherefore it is not worth their while to extend their

Conquests upon one another. But they may be serviceable
to one another by making a Diversion to the
Turks. 
         Tartars. The Tartars are woublesome Neighbours to the
Muscovites, who make no account of Faith or Alliances,
but make a Trade of Robbing and Plundering, against
whom there is no Remedy, but to kill them as fast as
one can; and this is not so easily to be done, because
they are very nimble. The Crim-Tartars are the most
mischievous to Poland, to hinder their Incursions, the
Muscovites are obliged to keep a considerable number of
Horse upon the Frontiers, and they give them sometimes
a Diversion, with the help of the Donisque Cosacks,
and the Nagage and Calmuck-Tartars. If the Muscovites
could maintain themselves in Kiovia, and a part of the
Ʋkraine, it would serve them at once to bridle these
Robbers, and for a Bulwark against the Turks. For the
Turks do not immediately border upon Muscovy, but by
the Country of the Crim-Tartars, who being Vassals of
the Turks, they make use of them like their hunting
Dogs. Wherefore it is of great consequence to Muscovy,
that the Turks do not become Masters of the whole Ʋkraine,
since thereby they would be enabled with the help of
the Cosacks and Tartars to do great mischief to Muscovy. 
        The Muscovites ought to have a watchful Eye over
the Poles,
         Poland. they being so situated, that they may do the
greatest mischief to Muscovy, especially since the Poles
are much better souldiers than the Muscovites in the
Field. But the Muscovites have at present a great Advantage
against Poland, since they are possessed of smolensko,
severia and Kiovia, which cover their Frontiers
on that side. Muscovy need not fear any thing much
from that side where it borders on sweden,
         sweden. not only because
it is able enough to defend it self there, if every
thing is quiet at home, but also because the swedes are
not ambitious to make any more Conquests on that side,
since to maintain such large and far distant Countries,
would be more hurtful than profitable to their state. 
And the Kings of sweden have of late shewed no great
inclination to fight with the Muscovites. But if the swedes
in conjunction with the Poles should attack the Muscovites,
         
they would put them very hard to it; whereas
also the Muscovites may prove very troublesome to swedeland
if they should join in conjunction with the Enemies
of swedeland. Nevertheless, the Muscovites ought not to
make any great account upon an Alliance with Denmark,
because they are far distant from one another, and
therefore cannot revenge themselves upon one another;
if one of them should put a Trick upon the other, and
as soon as he has obtained his aim, leave the other in the
lurch: Neither have the Muscovites hitherto appeared at
any general Treaties. CHAP. XII. Of the spiritual Monarchy of Rome: or, of
the Pope. § 1. Politick Reflections upon Popedom. THE Pope may be considered two different
ways: First, As far as the Articles which
are taught by him and differ from other Christians, are
agreeable or disagreeable with the Holy scriptures, and
consequently useful or prejudicial to salvation, which
Consideration we leave to Divines. secondly, As far
as the Pope is not only possessed of a considerable Principality
in Italy, but also pretends to be the sovereign
and supreme Head of Christendom, at least in spiritual
Matters, and in effect, exercises the said Power in
those states of Europe which profess themselves of the
same Communion with him. This second Consideration belongs to the Politicians,
for this spiritual sovereignty does introduce great alterations▪
and interferes with the supreme Civil Power;
nay, circumscribes and maims it. Wherefore since Religion
has been so interwoven with the Civil Interest, it
belongs to the perfection of an understanding Politician,
to be well instructed whence this spiritual Monarchy had
its Original, and by what means it hath so mightily increased
and is preserved. From whence also will appear,
of what nature are the chiefest Controversies now
in vogue among Christians in the Western Parts of the
World, how far they are owing either to the various
Interpretations of the Holy scripture, or to worldly
Interest; so that from thence a Wise Man may easily
judge, whether at any time these Controversies are likely
to be composed or not. 
§ 2. Now to look back to the first beginning of things,
we find, that before the Nativity of our saviour the Inhabitants
of the whole Universe, except the Jews, lived
in gross Ignorance as to spiritual Affairs. For what was
commonly taught concerning the Gods, was for the most
part involved in Fables and most extravagant absurdities
'Tis true,The Blindness of Heathens in Matters of Religion. some of the learned among them, have pretended
to give some rational Account concerning the Nature
of the Gods and the state of the soul; but all this
in so imperfect and dubious a manner, that they themselves
remained very uncertain in the whole matter. 
They agreed almost all of them in this Point, that mankind
ought to apply it self to the practice of Vertue,
but they did not propose any other Fruits, but the Honour
and Benefit which from thence did accrue to Civil
society. For what the Poets did give out concerning
the rewards of Vertue and punishments of Vice after
Death, was by these who pretended to be the wisest among
them, looked upon as Fables, invented to terrify
and keep in awe the common People. The rest of the
People lived at random, and what the Heathens called
Religion, did not contain any Doctrine or certain Articles
concerning the knowledge of Divine Matters. But
the greatest part of their Religious Worship consisted in
sacrifices and Ceremonies, which tended more to sports
and Voluptuousness, than to the Contemplation of Divine
Things. Wherefore the Heathen Religion did neither
Edify in this Life, nor afford any Hopes or Comfort
at the time of Death. § 3. The Constitution of the Jewish Religion. At that time the Jews were the only Nation
unto whom God had revealed the true Religion, which
could lead Mankind in the way of salvation. Nevertheless,
there was a vast difference betwixt that and
the Christian Religion, not only because the Jewish Religion
represented the saviour of the World and the
Fountain of salvation in Types and Promises; whereas
the Christian Religion comprehends the reality and accomplishment
of the same; but also because the Jewish
Religion was cloathed with a great many and those very
burthensome Ceremonies: And some of them being accommodated

to the natural inclination of that Nation,
they proved an obstacle to the general reception
of that Religion by all Nations: This ceremonial
part being like a Wall, whereby the Jews were
separated from other Nations. 'Tis true, all other Nations
were not excluded from receiving salvation through
the Belief in the saviour of the World who was to come. 
There were also some among the Jews, who were very
careful, and applied themselves to the conversion of such
as they kept Correspondence withal. But it was not
decreed by God Almighty to send all over the Earth at
that time his Delegates or Apostles, instructed with
peculiar Gifts to call all Nations to unite themselves
with the Jewish Church: And what was done by some
private Persons in converting of Infidels, was of no great
consequence in comparison of the whole World. Besides
this, the Jewish Nation being at that time the selected
People of God, adorned with great Prerogatives, and
having the possession of the only Temple of God, was
grown so proud, that the Jews despised all other Nations
besides themselves. They being also obliged by
the Institution of their Ceremonies, not to converse too
familiarly upon several accounts with other Nations;
this occasioned a mutual hatred betwixt the Jews and
them, which was a main obstacle to the propogation of
the Jewish Religion. Neither could other Nations easily
digest this, that as often as they were to attend the
solemn and publick divine service, they were first to
travel to Jerusalem, as if it were not in their power to
build a Temple equal to the other near home. Besides
this, such as received the Jewish Religion, were esteemed
among them one degree below the Natives, which was
the reason why very few could resolve for the Jewish
Religion's sake, to be despised among them as Foreigners. § 4. The Christian Religion is proper for all the world. But the Christian Religion is not only much
clearer, and also has other great Prerogatives above the
Jewish, which Consideration we will leave to the Divines:
But it is also freed from those Circumstances
which were particular to the Jewish Religion, and endowed
with all Qualifications requisite for an universal

Religion; wherefore every one is obliged to receive and
embrace it, which deserves particularly to be remarked,
that hereby we may investigate and penetrate to the very
bottom, the propriety and genius of the Christian Religion. 
For here is no particular place appointed by God
Almighty for performing in publick the Divine service,
nor can any place claim a Prerogative before another,
so that no Nation henceforward has any occasion to
make exception about the remoteness of the Temple;
but in all places you may lift up holy Hands unto him,
no Temple in the World having any particular promise
appertaining to it that God will sooner hear your Prayers
in that than in another. No Nation has according
to the Christian Religion, a precedency before another,
whereby one may claim a Prerogative above the other. 
Here is no Jew, no Greek, no Bond nor Freeman, but
they are all one in Jesus Christ. Here is no particular
Family or Tribe appointed by God for the publick administration
of Divine service as it was among the Jews;
but none is excluded here, provided he be endowed with
the necessary Qualifications. There is no Article in the
Christian Religion, which forbids us to cultivate with others
either familiarity, or to render to one another the
Duties required from us by the Law of Nature. It is purely and by it self considered,Not contrary to Civil Government. quite separated
from all worldly Ends and Interests; yet is her Doctrine
not in the least repugnant to, or alters Civil society
or Laws, as far as they are consonant to the Law
of Nature, but it rather (tho' that is not her main intention)
confirms the same. There is nothing to be
found in the Christian Religion, which is destructive to
the Ends of Civil society, or which hinders us from
living honestly, quietly and securely under the protection
of Civil Magistrates, or from executing in every respect
the highest Civil Power according to the Law of Nature,
true Reason and the Necessities of the state, or
from administring all Offices and performing such Duties
without offending against the Rules of Christianity,
as are requisite for the maintaining a state established
according to the Law of Nature. The Christian Religion
rather promotes all these things, expresly commanding
us strictly to observe every Commandement

of the Law of Nature, and especially those where no
temporal punishment could be conveniently inflicted by
the Civil Constitutions, and to perform our Duty with
all Faithfulness and Zeal, as far as the same is consonant
with Honesty and the Law of Nature. No other Religion or Philosophy comparable to it. 
        Wherefore not any Philosophy or Religion whatsoever
is in this point to be compared with the Christian Religion,
which may be evident enough to all who will
make a true comparison betwixt this and all the rest. 
And every body is therefore obliged as he hopes to answer
for his soul before God, not only to receive the
Christian Religion, but also all sovereigns and Magistrates
ought for the above-mentioned reasons, and out
of a Duty belonging to their Office, to introduce and
maintain it. It is objected, that the Effects of the Christian
Religion are not so visible, nor that the Life and
Conversation of a great many Christians is not different
from that of the Heathens and Turks; it is to be observed,
that this Fault is not to be imputed to the Christian
Doctrine, but to the Inclinations of such as profess
the name of Christians, but will not in earnest apply
themselves to alter their evil Inclinations, and to live according
to the wholesome Precepts of this Religion. § 5. Concerning the outward Government of Religion. As what we have hitherto said, can scarce be denied
by the more understanding sort, so there arises now
a Question, viz. Whether, according to the Doctrine of
the Christian Religion it is absolutely requisite, that the
outward Direction or Government of the same be committed
to another, besides him who has the supreme Civil
Power in a state? or, which is much the same,
Whether according to the Christian Doctrine, it be necessary
that the outward Government of it be lodged
with the whole Body, or one of the Clergy in particular
independent of the supreme Magistrate? Or, whether
there ought to be but one sovereign Administrator
of the Christian Religion, on whom all other Christian
states ought to depend in this Point? Or, which some
take for the same thing, whether every state ought to
be governed according to its own Constitutions and Interest?
Or whether all other states are obliged to be

slaves to one, and to promote the Interest of that one,
with the Detriment and Ruin of their own. What is meant by the external Government of Religion. 
        By the outward Direction or Government of the
Christian Religion, we understand the Power of constituting
certain Persons for the exercising of the publick
Divine service, and the supreme Jurisdiction over
their Persons; the supreme Administration and Direction
of such Possessions as are dedicated to Religious
services. The Power of making Laws for the outward
maintenance of Religion, and the determining of
such Differences as may arise among the Clergy under
what pretext soever it may be, and such like. We
make a great difference betwixt the outward Direction
of Religious Affairs and betwixt the Ministry of
the Church, which consists in teaching, preaching and
administring of the sacraments, all which, doubtless
belong only unto the Clergy. This Question also is to be
understood of a Church already planted and established,
not of a Church that is to be planted and established. 
For since the Christian Religion owed its Original to
Divine Revelation, no humane Power could pretend to
have any Direction in the same, before this Doctrine
was throughly proposed and taught by such as had an
immediate Authority for so doing from God Almighty. 
For when our saviour after his Resurrection did send
his Disciples as Delegates and Apostles throughout the
whole World, to publish and introduce the Christian
Religion, they received their Commission for Preaching
every where not from the supreme Civil Magistrates, but
from God himself: wherefore Kings as well as the common
People were obliged to acknowledge them as immediate
Messengers of God, and obediently to submit themselves
to their Doctrine; and it would be next to an absurdity
if any one should pretend to a Direction in such Matters,
as he was not instructed in before. From whence
arises this Consequence, that what has been said is to be
understood of such sovereigns or supreme Magistrates
as themselves profess the true Christian Religion, but
not of those who are Infidels or erroneous in the chief
Articles of the Christian Faith. For to commit the Direction
of Religion to the latter, would be to make the
Wolf a shepherd. 
§ 6. The Consideration of this Question according to the nature of Religion in general. This Question may be considered in three-several
ways: First, Whether this Necessity arises from
the Nature of each Religion in general? Or, secondly,
Whether it arises from the Genius of the Christian Religion
in particular? Or, Thirdly, Whether the same is
imposed upon us by Divine Institution or the particular
Command of God? That it should proceed from the
natural Constitution of Religion in general, I am in no
ways able to find out. For Reason does not tell me,
that if I intend to serve God, I must of necessity make
a division in the state, and thereby introduce two different
Powers independent of one another. The dismembring
of the supreme Power, or such a doubleheaded
sovereignty in a state, administers continual
Fuel, which at last breaks out into Jealousies, Divisions,
and intestine Commotions. On the other hand, it is in
no ways contrary to Reason to serve God, and at the
same time leave the supreme Direction of the outward
Matters belonging to Divine service, to such as have the
supreme Power in the state; if we suppose that those
who have the supreme Power in their Hands, will not
impose any thing upon their subjects which is false or
erroneous. It cannot be denied, that as every one is
bound by the Law of Nature to serve God; also is it
at the same time in his Power to perform the outward
Ceremonies in such a manner as he believes they are
most pleasing to God. But after Civil societies were instituted,
that same Power is thereby devolved to those
who have the supreme Administration of Affairs in a Civil
society. And the most antient Fathers who did not
live under any regulated Government, exercised this
Power in their Families, which used to be transferred
to the Eldest son, as haereditas eximia (or a hereditary
Prerogative) if the Brothers, after the Father's death,
did resolve to live together in one Community. But
when afterwards Civil societies were instituted, the same
Power was transferred to the Heads of these societies,
and that out of a weighty Consideration: For if every
one had been left to his free Choice in this Point, the
various and different Ceremonies in the Divine service
must needs have introduced Confusions, Divisions and

intestine Commotions. And tho' by the Jews the publick
Ministry was hereditary to one particular Family,
yet the inspection and supreme Direction was among
them reserved to those who had the supreme Civil Power
in their Hands, as the same is practised among most
other Nations. § 7. According to the Nature of the Christian Religion in particular. Neither can any Reason be given why the Christian
Religion is particularly so qualified, as to imply a
necessity, that the abovementioned Direction should be
committed to any other than the supreme Magistrates,
tho' it contains something more than is taught us by the
Light of Nature; since we suppose that by vertue of this
directive Power, they ought not to impose any thing upon
us contrary to the Word of God, nor be a hinderance
to the Priests in performing the Ministry according
to the Ordinances of God in the Holy scriptures. 
Neither can I find out any Reason, why the supreme
Magistrates should want means duly to qualify themselves
for this Administration or Direction. At least,
they may let this Direction be exercised under their Authority
by such as have acquired sufficient abilities for
the same: In like manner as sovereigns exercise their
Power by others in Civil Affairs, so the Power of making
Laws was never denied to appertain to sovereigns,
tho' it is certain that a Doctor or Professor of the Law,
ought to be better instructed in them than is required
from a King. For both in these and other Matters, sovereigns
ought to act with the Advice of such as have
applied themselves throughly to such Affairs. And as it
is against the Interest of a Good and Wise King, if this
Power be not well exercised, so it is both his Duty and
Interest to see the administration of Religious Matters
well performed. For the more zealous and earnest he is
in maintaining the Christian Religion, the more obedient
and better qualified his subjects are likely to be,
and he may the better hope for the Blessing of God Almighty. 
Neither can any thing be alledged why God
Almighty should not as well afford his Assistance to a
Christian and Orthodox sovereign as to any other,
to perform this Government praise-worthily. Lastly,
because the Christian Religion does not in any other

way derogate from Civil Ordinances and Laws, or from
the Power of Civil Magistrates as far as they are founded
upon the Law of Nature; so it is not to be supposed
that it disagrees from this in this one Point, except a positive
Command of God can be alledged for the proof of
this Assertion. Whether there be such a Command in
the Holy scriptures, which expresly forbids sovereigns
to intermeddle with this Direction, and allows the same
to others in the highest degree of sovereignty without
any dependency at all, those are obliged to prove, who
endeavour to maintain this Assertion. In the mean while
we will inquire into the first Occasion, and by what degrees
this Ecclesiastical Monarchy was established in the
Western Churches. § 8. First propagation of the Christian Religion. The Apostles therefore having after the Ascension
of our saviour, according to the Instructions received
from his own Mouth, begun to spread the Doctrine
of the Christian Religion in far distant Countries, met
with great approbation in a short time, both among the
Jews and other Nations; but more especially among the
Common People, which having hitherto lived in gross
Ignorance and in a miserable Estate, very joyfully received
this Doctrine, which enlightened and comforted
them in the miseries of this Life. The Apostles also
themselves, who were of mean Extraction and of no
great Authority, used to converse most among this sort
of People, as having the most easie access to them as
their equals. But Men of Quality and Learning did
scare at first think it worth their while to apply
themselves diligently to search into the bottom of this
Religion, and very few of them would profess it. The Methods of God in Establishing the Christian Religion. 
        If we may inquire into the Reasons why it was the
pleasure of the Wise God to choose this way of planting
the Christian Religion, it seems very probable, that
God was not pleased to introduce the Christian Religion
by the Power and Authority of Civil Magistrates,
nor by the Assistance of Learned Men, because it might
not be deemed hereafter a state Trick, or a Philosophical
speculation; but that whenever a due comparison
might be made betwixt the slender beginnings and prodigious
encrease of this Religion, the World might from

thence conclude, that the whole was something above
humane Power. And because the Learned had proved
unsuccessful with all their subtilties in their Discoveries
concerning Divine Matters; and that socrates and some
others who were sensible of the vanity of the commonly
received superstitions, and had condemned them as such,
had not been able to abolish those, and in lieu thereof,
to introduce a better Religion; God Almighty was willing
to convince the World of the Vanity of worldly
Wisdom, and to shew, how easie it was for him to effect
this great Work by the means, even of poor
Fishermen. Besides this, the Doctrine of the Apostles
seemed to be full of absurdity to the Philosophers and
Politicians, the same being founded upon, and begun
with Jesus who was crucified. For it appeared very
strange to them that the Apostles should acknowledge
him for the son of God and their saviour, who was of
a hated and despised Nation, who having lived without
any great splendour, or performed any great Heroic Actions;
had besides this, not made himself Famous throughout
the World by long study or Preaching, but had in
his younger years suffered a most infamous Death. And
this is the reason why the Jesuites, when they teach the
Christian Religion among the refined Chineses, do not
begin with the Doctrine of the Passion of Christ; but
argue first with them out of the Principles of natural
Religion, and so at last come about to this Article of
the Christian Faith. But whether these Fathers by this
method are likely to be more successful than the Apostles
I will not determine here. Way the meanest first converted. It may also be alledged,
that God was pleased to deliver the common People among
the Heathens, before great Men, out of their misery
and darkness; because the first were seduced by the
latter, and upheld in their superstition; for these, tho'
they were sensible of the Vanity of the Pagan Religion,
yet did not do their utmost endeavours to search after a
better. Wherefore God Almighty by first drawing away
the common People from Paganism, did undermine
the whole structure, which was forced to fall of
it self. since the simplicity and credulity of the common
People were the Foundation stones of the Pagan
Religion. 
§ 9. Persecution of the first Church. The Christian Doctrine therefore having been
most of all, at first, spread abroad among the common
People, as I have said before, it was grievously oppressed
and persecuted afterwards by the Roman Emperours;
for in the Territories of the Roman Empire it had
its first beginning and chief increase. One of the
main occasions of these Persecutions was their Ignorance
of the true nature of this new Religion, or what was
the main end of it; since they saw the number of the
Christians daily encrease, who all despised the Pagan
Religion. The Emperours thought it below their high
station to make a due enquiry into the Foundation of
this Doctrine, and there were very few among the first
Christians that were fitly qualified to represent their Doctrine
in due form to People of Quality. The Calumnies against the Primitive Christians. These therefore
used to be led away by the false suggestions of the
Enemies of the Christians, who insinuated to them, that
the Christians in their nocturnal Assemblies, did practise
all sorts of Debaucheries much after the manner as formerly
used to be practised at the Festivals of Bacchus, or
else that they were then Plotting against the state. There were also not a few among the Romans,
         The Politick Reasons of the Romans against it. who
being averse to any Innovation whatsoever, were of
Opinion, that since the Roman Empire had stood in a
flourishing Condition several Ages past under the antient
Religion, the same ought not to be abrogated; especially,
they did think it in no ways becoming the common
People to pretend to an Innovation and to more
Wisdom than their sovereigns. The Christians also having
among themselves a certain Form of Ecclesiastical
Government, this rendred them suspected to the Romans,
who looked upon them as such that were for setting up
a Faction against the state, and erecting a new society
in it, and so to divide the Empire, and at last make themselves
Masters of it: some also there were, who perceiving,
that the more the numbers of the Christians increased,
the less frequented were the Temples of the
Heathens, and that the Roman Empire began to decline
and received great shocks; they perswaded themselves
that these Misfortunes befel them, because those Gods
through whose Assistance the Roman Empire arrived to

the Pinacle of its Grandeur, were now despised among
them, and therefore looked upon the Christians as an
Atheistical Generation, endeavouring to over-turn the
very Foundations of Religion. And because the Christians
refused to adore the Idols, notwithstanding the
Emperours Commands, and suffered the most prodigious
Tortures and Death with constancy and even Joy; they
were treated like a perverse and obstinate sort of People
by the Romans, who encreased their Cruelties to maintain
their Authority against them. But no sufficient
Reasons can be alledged for the justification of these
Persecutions against the Christians, which ought to be
considered no otherwise than unlawful Tyrannies, and
pernicious Abuses of the supreme Civil Power. For their
subjects had received this Religion according to the
express Command of God, which could nor ought not
to be opposed by the Civil Power; the Magistrates as
well as the subjects being obliged to receive it, except
they would grosly sin against God Almighty. Neither
could their Ignorance serve them for an excuse, since
this being a new Doctrine, it was their Duty to take
due information concerning the same, before they had
sent the Innocent Christians to Execution, only, because
they refu•ed to obey the Commands of their sovereigns,
which ought not to oblige them to Obedience in this
Point. For no body ought to give sentence of Death
against any one before he is duly informed concerning
the nature of the Crime, he is accused of. §. The first Church Government. 10. And because the sovereigns did at first not
concern themselves for the welfare of the Christian Religion,
the Christians therefore did without their assistance
constitute a Ministry and the outward Church
Government among themselves, which was maintained
among them as well as it could. For this is common
to all societies which are instituted without the consent
of the supream Magistrate, that the Members thereof
are forced to agree among themselves, which way to
order their Affairs best, and to Constitute certain Rules,
and Governours for the management of the societies:
Else, according to the Rules of Policy, founded upon
the Law of Nature, the outward Government of Religion

belongs to the sovereigns. But because the Magistrates
would not perform their duty at that time,
the Christians were obliged to Constitute Ministers of
their own accord, who received their maintainance from
the Charity of good Christians. And if any Errors
did arise, or other matters happened of such consequence,
that the same could not be decided by one assembly,
several of these Assemblies used to consult among
themselves concerning the matter in question, or
leave the determination to an Assembly of such Mininisters
as were next at hand. Tho it is certainly else
not to be allowed in a state, that private persons should
Constitute a society among themselves, consisting especially
of a considerable number; yet the Assemblies and
synods of the antient Christians are not therefore to be
deemed unlawful Meetings; since their only aim was
the exercise of their Religion, which being commanded
them by God, ought not to have been opposed by any
human Power. Neither is it reasonable, that because
the Magistrates were careless both of their Duty and
their own salvation, the rest also who had knowledge of
the true Religion, should lose the benefit of their salvation;
against which no Civil Power ought to extend
its Jurisdiction. And, as it is allowable for every body
to defend himself with his own strength and Weapons,
if Magistrates either can or will not protect him; so,
if a sovereign will not do his Office as to the preservation
of my soul, I have as much more right to take
care of it without him, as the soul is dearer to me than
the Body; and as by the exercise of the True Religion
my Fellow subjects are less endangered, than by a violent
defense of my own person; for no body by becoming
a subject in a Civil society, does thereby renounce
the priviledge of taking care for his soul and
Body. Otherwise no doubt is to be made, that if it
had been the Will of God to introduce the Christian
Religion by the Conversion of the Emperours and
Kings, these would with their Commands have assisted
the Apostles in their Office, thrown down the Temples
of the Idols, abolished the Pagan Idolatry, and would
according to the instruction of the Apostles, have
Constituted the outward Church Government, and

maintained it afterwards. For it is evident enough,
that this has been the manner of proceeding, as to this
point in other Countries, where the Christian Religion
has been first introduced into the state, by the authority
of their sovereigns. §. What persuasions arise thence. 11. Nevertheless because the first Christians were
obliged, when the Magistrates failed in their Duty, to
regulate and Constitute a Church Government among
themselves, this has occasioned the rise of several Errors,
which are of no small consequence. For, some have
from thence, endeavoured to make this inference, that
the people, as they stand in opposition to sovereignty,
has an original and inherent Right to Elect Church Ministers. 
Tis true a Minister ought not to be obtruded
upon an Assembly against their will, especially if they
have a lawful exception against him; because he would
edifie but little in his station; nevertheless, it is not
from hence to be concluded, that, because some Assemblies
have been obliged to provide themselves with Ministers
when the Magistrates did neglect their Duty,
therefore the same Right is ever since Originally in the
People. For without this supposition an Assembly has
as little right to call and Constitute a Church Minister,
as to dispose of Publick Offices and Employments
in the state. And if in some places the Common
People or some others have such a Right, it is
enjoyed either by connivance, or a concession from the
supreme Magistrate, whom we suppose to be a Christian
and Orthodox. some also have been endeavouring to
draw from thence this Conclusion, viz. That the outward
Church Government is separate and distinct from
the supreme Civil Power, and that it ought to be administred
either by the whole Clergy, or else to depend
absolutely on one single person of the Clergy; so that,
according to this supposition, there must be in each
Christian state two distinct Bodies independent of one another,
one of which must be called the Ecclesiastick
(Ecclesia) the other the Politick state, (Civitas) and
each of them to be sovereign in its Government. 
But, tho this has been made use of sometimes, when
Magistrates were quite negligent of their Duty, this

ought not to be drawn into Consequence, when Magistrates
are ready, duely to execute their Office. Neither
does it follow, that the same power which belonged
to the Apostles at that time when the Church was first to
be Established, is now devolved to such Church Ministers
as have not an immediate Vocation from God in the Established
Church. For the Office of the Apostles was particular,
and very different from the Church Ministry, as it is
exercised now adays; in like manner as the outward
Church Government is very different from the Ministry. 
And as every lawful Church Minister is therefore not
immediately an Apostle, so the King is therefore not
immediately a Priest. And tho the Christian Religion
ows its Original to God, and is above human reason;
nevertheless the supreme Magistrate may be capable of
having the outward direction over it, with the assistance
of such persons as are best versed in such Affairs. 
And, from what has been said, this Conclusion may be
made: viz. That the practice of the Primitive Church
as to this Point of the outward Church Government,
is not to be made a perpetual and universal Rule of the
Church Government in a state, which is under the Jurisdiction
of a Christian and Orthodox Magistrate. For
that practice was accommodated to the Circumstances
of their Affairs then: But, where both the whole
People and the sovereign have received the Christian
Religion, the case is quite different, and implies not
any necessity that the state should thereby become a
Body with two Heads. § 12. Constantine could not quite alter the former state of the Church. After Constantine the Great had embraced the
Christian Faith, the Church began to get another Face,
the sovereign being then fitly qualified to take upon
him the outward Church Government. Nevertheless
the said outward Church Government could not be so
immediately and regularly ordered, as if from the first
beginning the sovereigns had received the Christian Religion;
For, there were a great many remnants left of
the former provisional Church Government, which afterwards
occasioned great abuses in the Western or
Latin Church. For, it was scarce possible for these
Emperours, who passed then but for Novices in the

Christian Religion, to make use at first of their Power
in Ecclesiastical Matters, and to bridle the Authority of
the Bishops and Clergy, that were very backward to part
with it. They were rather obliged to keep fair with
them, and to make use of their assistance to Establish
themselves in the Throne, since most of their subjects
being then become Christians paid a profound Veneration
to their Priests. The first Christian Emperors also
made use of several Ministers and Officers in their
Courts, who were as yet Pagans; wherefore it seemed
not just, that Matters concerning the outward Church
Government, should be determined by a Council, whereof
some Members were Heathens. This was the reason why the Vocation of Bishops
and other Ecclesiasticks was performed for the most
part according to the Customs introduced before. Of making Bishops. And
not only such Controversies as arose concerning certain
Articles of Faith, but also of such as had a relation to
the outward Order and Government of the Church,
and all other differences of moment among the Clergy
of the higher Rank were brought before the Councils,
or the Assemblies of the Clergy where these did pretend
alone to have the right to Preside and to give their
Votes; Tho it is certain that not only the right of calling
them together belongs to the sovereigns, who also
for a considerable time have exercised that power; but
also the direction and Presidentship of such Assemblies:Of Presiding in Councils. 
whatever matter is to be debated there, does at least belong
to the Prince, if their Decrees shall pass afterwards
for, and have the power of a Law or a definitive
sentence in the state. Indeed the supreme Magistrates,
no more than the Clergy can pretend to a right
of introducing new Articles of Faith, or of explaining
the scripture according to their own pleasure: Nevertheless,
the whole Duty of a Christian being contained
in the whole scriptures, which God has commanded
to be published for the benefit of Mankind,
and not to be committed, like sibylline Oracles, to the
custody of certain Priests; and since others as well
as the Clergy have the opportunity to comprehend the
sense of the Holy scripture, it seems not at all contrary
to reason, that the Civil Magistrates should have

at least the supreme direction of these Assemblies,
where matters concerning the different interpretations
of the scripture are to be debated. From hence also
this benefit will accrue to the Publick, that thereby the
extravagant Heats and immoderate Passions, which are
commonly obvious in these Disputes, may be moderated,
matters may be debated with prudence, and not
stretched too high out of a fondness of contradicting,
nor that any one by malicious interpretation of his
Words and Opinion may fall under slanders and Censures,
or the Excommunication be thundred out without
necessity against the innocent. And because the
first Christian Emperours did either neglect this their
Right, or had no opportunity of exercising it, this occasioned
great confusion in some Councils:Abuses in the Council•. From hence
also the Pope took an opportunity, after he had set
himself above the Western Bishops and Councils themselves,
to take upon him an Authority to decide Controversies
even concerning Articles of Faith, to introduce
such Canons or Ecclesiastical Laws in the Church,
as he thought most proper for his Interest and state,
and by pretending to the highest Jurisdiction to exempt
the Church from the Jurisdiction of the Civil Magistrates:
For when once this Opinion was established,
that all these Matters did belong of right to the Clergy
only, without having any respect to the Civil Power,
the Pope did pretend to the same by the same Right,
by which he had set himself above the Clergy and the
whole Church. §. Of the Episcopal Jurisdiction. 12. Besides this it was the Custom among the
Antient Christians, that they very seldom pleaded their
Causes, according to the admonition of s. Paul, before
the Pagan Judges: But, in case of differences among
themselves, they used to refer the same to the decision
of a Bishop, that by their Contests they might not
give any occasion of scandal to the Heathens, since it
might seem unbecoming, that those who made profession
of despising worldly Riches, should quarrel among
themselves about the same. This Custom as it was very
useful and praiseworthy at that time; so because it was
not Abrogated, but rather confirmed afterwards by the

Christian Emperors, tho the Courts of Justice were
then Governed by Christian Judges, the Bishops afterwards
pretended to a formal Jurisdiction, which did
not only derogate from the Authority of Temporal
Judges, but also the Bishops were thereby diverted from
performing such Duties as properly belonged to their
Office. There was also another Custom among the first
Christians, that if a scruple arose concerning nearness of
Blood in Marriages,Concerning Marriages. they used to take the Opinion of
the Priests in this Case, and if any differences did arise
betwixt married People, it used to be referred to the
Arbitration of the Priests; who at the time also when
the Nuptials were Celebrated, used to give them their
Benediction and Pray with them. This, if in itself
considered, very good beginning, furnished an occasion
of great Abuses afterwards, the Pope having from
hence taken a pretext to subject all Matrimonial Affairs,
concerning Divorces, Nullities of Marriages, successions,
Inheritances, and the like, of the greatest Consequence,
under his Jurisdiction, who, to render his
pretensions the more plausible, did make Marriage a sacrament. Besides this,Concerning Excommunication. the first Christians were very desirous to
recommend their Religion to the Heathens by a Holy
and Innocent Life, especially since some sort of Vices
were not punishable according to the Pagan Laws. 
Wherefore in the Primitive Church, if any one had
given a Publick scandal by his vicious Life, a certain
Church Penance was laid upon him, which at the utmost
did amount to this, that he was excluded from
the Communion of the Christians. Which Custom as
it is not unreasonable, so it may be of good use in a
Christian state, provided the Civil Magistrate have the
supreme direction, and take care that such a Censure
be not abused out of obstinacy or private ends and passion. 
Especially since these Censures have had such an
influence upon Civil societies, that in the Eighth Age
no body would Converse with any one that was Excommunicated. 
And this Power ought not to be given
to the absolute disposal of any one, except to the
sovereign, if you will not divide the sovereignty. But
in what manner the Popes have afterwards abused this

Censure, and extended it even to the Excommunication
of Emperors, Kings, and whole Commonwealths, and
by forbidding the Publick Exercise of Divine service,
Absolving the subjects from their Allegiance, and bestowing
their Kingdoms upon others, have forced them
to a compliance against their own Interest, is sufficiently
known out of History. Yet in the Eastern Empire
these Abuses did not grow up to the same height, for
the Emperors at Constantinople did at least so far maintain
their Authority against the Clergy, that they durst
not pretend to dominere over them. Besides that the
Eastern Bishop wanted an opportunity to set themselves
one above the other, because the Bishops at Constantinople
had no other Prerogative allowed him, but Precedency
of Rank above the others without his Diocess, but not
any Jurisdiction. §. The Origin of the Authority of the Popes. 14. But in the Western parts the Church afterwards
took quite another Face, since the Bishop of
Rome had projected a peculiar sort of a Monarchy,
which by degrees he brought to perfection, and has not
had its parallel ever since the memory of mankind, it
being founded upon quite other Principles, and upheld
by very different means from other states. The more influence
this Monarchy has had for several hundred years
together upon the states and Affairs of Europe, and has
been maintained with great Zeal by one, and opposed by
the other party, the more it will be worth our while, to
dive into the first Origin and Constitution of it, and to
alledge some reason, why in the last Age this Monarchy
was reduced to a tottering condition, but has recollected
its vigour in ours. From whence a wise Man also
may be able to judge what success may be hoped for
from the Projects of those, who are for reconciling the
differences betwixt the Protestants and Papists. Wherefore,
it may be said, that towards the increase of this
Monarchy, so pernicious to the supreme Civil Power,
has not a little contributed, tho afar off, the Barbarity
and ignorance,Barbarity and Ignorance contributed to it. which, after the decay of the Roman
Empire, did spread itself over the Western parts. 
For bad Wares are best vented in the dark, or at least
by a dim light: And an ignorant person is sooner prevailed

upon to believe ridiculous stories than a wise
Man versed in all sorts of sciences. There were several causes,The Causes of this ignorance. which promoted this barbarity,
which did degenerate afterwards into the worst
sort of pedantry, (whereas the former Age had been
sufficiently instructed with learned Men. ) One of the
principal ones was the Invasion made upon the Western
Provinces of the Roman Empire by those Nations, who
tho sufficiently Brave, were ignorant of Learning; which
occasioned for one or two Ages after great Changes in
the Government, bloody Wars, horrible disorders, and
all sorts of miseries in the Empire. And Learning being
the product of Peace and Prosperity, it is little regarded
in times of War, or during the Distractions of a state;
since then there is but little leisure time given for the
use of Books. The schools are commonly destroyed,
and the Teachers obliged to make shift, where best they
can, a Musquet being at such times of more use than
a school satchel. The school-Masters especially are
forced to shut up shop at such times, if the victorious
Enemy is ignorant of Learning, and makes no account
of Books. There are also some who affirm that the
Clergy was accessary to this barbarism. For, because
the Philosophers had under the Reigns of the Pagan
Emperours proved very mischievous to them, and afterward
under the Christian Emperours continued to oppose
themselves against the Clergymen especially, these
had conceived such a hatred against Philosophy, and
against all such as professed it, that they not only infused
the same into their Auditors, but also removed
out of the schools and took from the young students,
who were committed to their care, the Pagan Authors,
under pretence that they might otherwise be again infected
with the erroneous Principles of the Pagans, and
that it could not but be sinful for Christians to read such
Books as were filled every where with the names of the
Pagan-Idols, which they would not have as much as
named by Christians. They related a story concerning
s. Hierom how that he was whipped in a Vision with
Rods,s. Hierom's Dream. because he used frequently to Read the Works of
Cicero; and about the year 400. after the Birth of our
saviour; the Council of Carthage forbid the Bishops

the reading of Pagan Authors. And Learning being
in those miserable times become almost useless except
to those who intended to profess Divinity, and the
remnants of Learning being lodged therefore among
the Clergy, the main Institution in the schools was
only directed for that Purpose, and the rest of the
young Disciples were not very forward to dive much
into the secrets of Antient Learning. And that Ignorance
and Barbarism have greatly promoted the establishment
of Popery is evident enough to those, who will consider
that in a learned Age those Decretals which are
ascribed to the first Popes, could never have passed
Muster; which nevertheless have been made use of to
persuade the People that the Bishops of Rome have
exercised an Authority from the very beginning of Christianity,
to prescribe Laws ot the Christian World. But when afterwards the times proved more favourable
in Europe,
         The Pedantry introduced into the schools. and the Popes perceived that some
among the most considerable Nations of Europe could
not be longer kept in a gross Ignorance, they introduced
into the schools, over which they had assumed the supreme
Direction, the most miserable sort of Pedantry,
which is also maintained by their Creatures with great
earnestness in their schools to this very day. But above
all the rest, it seems that the ignorance of the true
Principles of Policy, has had a main stroke in laying
the Foundation of Popery, for want of which they
were not then duely instructed concerning the Foundation,
Nature, and Perfection of the supreme Civil
Power, and that no state could be esteemed well Established,
where the supreme Civil Power was either divided
or diminished. The Greek and Roman Polititians prejudicial to Monarchy. And the Grecian and Roman Politicians
themselves had divulged most pernicious Doctrines
concerning the division and mixture of the supreme
Power, whereby they had enamoured the People
with an Aristocratical or Democratical sort of Government,
but infused into them such a hatred against
Monarchy, that it was a common Maxim among them,
that the more they could incr••ch upon the Authority
of the Prince, the more it must turn to the advantage
of the state. In this pernicious Opinion a great many
were confirmed by the Tyrannical proceedings of the

Emperours, who were mortally hated by most of their
subjects. It was therefore no great wonder, that at
the time of this general Ignorance the knowledge of
true Policy was not taught among the Christian Clergy,
since it seemed to them to be repugnant to their Profession. 
From hence it was, that, when by degrees the
Foundation of the Ecclesiastical sovereignty was laid,
few did throughly understand of what Consequence
this undertaking was, and how prejudicial it would
prove to the supreme Civil Power, when ever it could
be brought to perfection. And we see even to this day,
that in those schools, which are under the care of the
Popish Clergy, the Principles of true Policy are either
neglected, or at least so disfigured that they may not
be hurtful to the Authority of the Popes, but rather
serve to support it. §. Why Rome was made the place of Residence of the Ecclesiastical Monarchy. 15. But the chief reason, why Rome was chosen
for the place of Residence of the Ecclesiastical Monarchy,
seems to be, that this City had a particular Prerogative
of being the Capital City of the Roman Empire,
where the Christian Religion at first had its r•se
and increase. For what is related concerning s. Peter's
Chair is nothing but a vain pretence, which may be
easily seen from thence, that afterwards the Bishop of
Constantinople had the next place assigned him after the
Bishop of Rome, only because that City was then the
place of Residence of the Emperour, and new Rome. 
And when afterwards the Western Roman Empire was
come to decay, and the City of Rome had lost its former
lustre, the Bishop of Constantinople disputed the
precedency with the Roman Bishop. After the Persecutions,
which the Christians had endured under the
Pagan Emperours, were ceased, and they afterwards
enjoyed their full Liberty, the Clergy began, under pretence
of introducing a wholesome Order in the Church
to Establish a particular sort of Government or Hierarchy,
the Bishops having then begun to claim a great
Prerogative above the Priests. The Bishops also were
made subordinate to one another, so that commonly
the inspection over the Bishops in a certain Province
was committed to the Bishop of the Capital City of the

same Province,Metropolitans. who being then called Metropolitans,
did afterwards, viz. about the Eighth Century most of
them assume the name of Archbishops. Four of them
were most eminent above all the rest, viz. The Archbishops
of Rome,
         Patriarchs. 
         Constantinople, Antioch and Alexandria,
these being then the four principal Cities of the
Roman Empire; and the Archbishop of Jerusalem was
added to their number, because of the Antient Holiness
of that City. And tho the Emperor Phocas, out
of a spite against the Patriarch of Constantinople, who
who would not approve of the Murther committed
upon Mauritius, did grant the precedency to Boniface
III. the then Bishop of Rome, who did thereupon
take upon him the Title of Oecumenical Bishop; yet
this Prerogative did not extend any further than to bare
Precedency, nor did imply any Power or Jurisdiction
over the rest, which the other Patriarchs never acknowledged. 
And a considerable time before, when the Bishop
of Rome pretended to put his Commands upon the
Bishops of Africa, and for that purpose alledged a
Canon of the Council of Oliva, which was falsified,
they sent him back a very smart Answer. And in the whole business there is no footsteps of a
Divine Institution to be met withal,Of the Popes Power. the same being
purely Human, nor can any reason be alledged, why the
Bishop of Rome possesses the first Rank, other than why
he of Antioch has the third among them. And because
one state cannot prescribe Laws to another, therefore
if any Prerogatives have been granted to the Bishop of
Rome by the Roman Emperors, or the Antient Councils,
(which were nothing formerly but an Assembly of the
Clergy of the Roman Empire,) the same do not oblige
any other state, nor can they extend beyond the
Bounds and Jurisdiction of the antient Roman Empire. 
But if we put the Case that some Christian Princes or
states have afterwards allowed to the Pope a certain
power over the Church in their Dominions, this was
either done because they either understood not the true
nature of this Power, or because they were deceived by
the Popes. In the first Case the same is to be deemed
nothing else but a Treaty or Alliance with the Pope,
the better to Administer the Church Affairs with the

Pope's Direction. such a Treaty or Alliance as it Originally
proceeds from the Consent of that state; so
the same may be Annulled again, in the same manner
as other Alliances are, whenever it proves prejudicial
to the state, or the Pope begins to abuse the Authority
granted him by the state. But if the Pope has either
by Fraud or Imposition obtained his Power over other
states, these so misguided and thus surprised states,
have a right, as soon as they have discovered the Fraud,
and are convinced of their Error, to shake off such an
unjust Usurpation, and besides may demand satisfaction
for the dammages sustained by these impostures. §. Further Increase of the Ecclesiastical sovereignty. 16. Neither could the Bishops of Rome extend
their Power over the Western parts all at once, but it
was introduced from time to time, by degrees and by
various Artifices, and under several pretences. For,
when they had once fastened their Paws, they did not
retreat till they had obtained their pretensions, tho they
were several times denied admittance. They did very
wisely take hold of that opportunity which presented
itself, and was the chiefest of all in my jugdment,
when the Emperors began to choose other places of
Residence besides Rome,
         What contributed to it. since by their constant presence
there they might easily have kept under the ambitious
designs of the Bishops. For the Bishops of Constantinople,
who questionless were no less proud and ambitious
than those of Rome, could never gain this Point. 
The next thing which mainly contributed to this
Power, was, that afterwards the Western Empire was
divided into several new Kingdoms, erected by barbarous
and Pagan Nations; and these having been converted
to the Christian Faith with the assistance of the
Romish Church, thought themselves obliged to pay to
her a profound respect, and to honor her as the most
antient and the principal of the Western parts. To recite all the particulars here is not for our purpose,The Popes Confirmation of Bishops. 
it will be sufficient to touch upon some of the
main Points: it is therefore to be remarked, that since
the Fifth Century the Bishops which lived on this side
of the Alpes used to go to Rome to visit the sepulchres
of s. Peter and s. Paul out of a superstition or a Devotion

very common in those days, or because they thereby
intended to testifie their firm adherency to the Christian
Faith. This voluntary Devotion was afterwards by
degrees changed into a necessity, and such as neglected
it, used to receive severe rebukes. From hence it was easie
for the Popes afterwards to pretend that the Bishops
ought to receive their Confirmation from Rome. some
other Bishops and Churches also, that were Novices in
comparison of the antient Roman Church used to refer
themselves to, and ask the advice of the Church of
Rome concerning some Matters of great Consequence,
and the true use and interpretation of the Canons. And
when they once perceived at Rome that their answers
were taken as decisions, they began to send their Decrees
before they were demanded, under pretence that
Rome being the first seat of the Christian Bishops it
ought to take effectual care that the Canons and Ecclesiastical
Laws were duely put in Execution. Under
the same pretence they made themselves immediate
Judges over the Differences arisen betwixt the Bishops,
and incroaching upon the Right and Jurisdiction of the
Metropolitans, used to depose such Bishops, as according
to their Opinion had not a right Ordination; or
such as were accused of some enormous Crimes, they
obliged to appear before them at Rome to defend their
Cause. And if there were some that pretended to
a Prerogative, or to obtain an Exemption from the
Canons, they did Travel to Rome, where they were
kindly received and incouraged in their demands, whereby
the staple of Dispensations and Favours to be
granted, was established at Rome: And if any one had
lost his Cause before the ordinary Judge, he used to
Appeal to Rome, where he was kindly received and
incouraged. The French Historians relate, that, because
the Emperor Henry had made the City of Arles the Capital
City over seven Provinces, the Pope Constituted
the Archbishop of the said City his Vicar in France,
for fear lest the said Archbishop might by degrees attempt
to make himself Patriarch of France. And this
Archbishop chose rather to have the inspection, tho precariously,
over seventeen Provinces, into which France
was divided at that time, than to be the Head only of

seven in his own right. This Man to add the more
Authority to his Commision, did as much as in him
was, endeavour to Establish the Popes Authority
there. Afterwards in the Eighth Century, when great
Disorders and Debaucheries were become frequent among
the Monks and Clergy,Of the Monk Winifred. 
          an English Frier, whose
name was Winifred, and who afterwards called himself
Boniface, did out of a particular Zeal take upon himself
the Reformation of the Manners and Lives of the
Clergy; and did endeavour to Establish the Christian
Religion in several parts of Germany, but especially in
Thuringia and Friezland. This Man, to acquire the
greater Authority to himself, had entirely Devoted himself
to the Interest of the Roman Chair, from whence
he received the Episcopal Pall, and the Title of Archbishop
of Mayence, having also been Constituted by
Pope Gregory III. his Vicar, with full Power to call
Councils, and to Constitute Bishops in those places
which were by his assistance Converted to the Christian
Faith, and with ample recommendations to those
Nations, and to Charles Martel, the then Grand Master
of France, that he should take him into his protection,
which he very willingly did. And when afterwards
his son Carlomannus shewed a great forwardness
to have the Church Discipline regulated, Boniface
was very willing to take upon him this Office to the
great advantage of the Roman Chair. He also at the
request of Carlomannus called a Council in Germany,
and at the request of Pepin several synods in France,
where Boniface always was President in the quality of
Legat of the Roman Chair. In the first Council the
Clergy signed a certain Confession of Faith, whereby
they obliged themselves, not only to maintain the Catholick
Faith, but also to remain in constant Union
with the Roman Church, and to be obedient to the successours
of s. Peter. This Boniface also was the first,
who put it upon the Bishops of Germany to receive the
Episcopal Pall from the Pope, who sent it to the Bishops
of France without their request, thereby to unite them
with the Roman Chair. And when once these Ornaments
were become customary amongst them, they were put

upon them afterwards as of absolute Necessity, and
the Episcopal Function was forbidden to be exercised
by them before they had received these Ornaments. Besides this,Annals. the Popes assumed to themselves an Authority
of giving leave to the Bishops to remove from
one Episcopal see to another, and obliged all the Western
Bishops to receive their Confirmation from Rome,
for which they were obliged to pay a certain summ of
Money as an acknowledgement, which was since converted
to Annals. The Popes also by making void the
Decisions of the provincial synods or Assemblies, overthrew
their Authority; wherefore when every body
plainly perceived that the Decrees of these Assemblies
could produce no other Effects but to be continually annulled
by the Popes, without as much as hearkening to
any Reasons, they were by degrees quite abolished. 
Pope Gregory VII. also forced the Bishops to swear an
Oath of Fealty to the Pope, and by a Decree forbid
that none should dare to condemn any one that had appealed
to the Pope. They were also not forgetful in
sending Legates or Nuncios to all places, whose business
was, to exercise in the name of the Pope the same Authority
which had formerly belonged to the Bishops,
Metropolitans and Provincial Assemblies. § 17. Riches of the Church. This growing Ecclesiastical sovereignty was the
more prejudicial to the supreme Civil Power, the more
the Church daily increased both in Numbers and Riches. 
The first Foundation of the Wealth of the Church was
laid by the Liberality and Charity of Princes and other
great Men, who were of Opinion, that they did a very
agreeable service to God Almighty if they were liberal
and bounteous towards his Church and the Clergy. 
And after they had once perswaded the People, that by
doing good Works, among which the Gifts and Donations
for Pious uses had the first place they could and
must deserve Heaven from God Almighty; this Liberality
was increased to a high degree. Yet the voluntary
Contributions of the People not being able to satisfy
the avarice of the Clergy, which increased together
with their Riches, other ways and artifices were found
out to empty the Peoples Purses, and a great many unnecessary

Institutions introduced which were to be purchased
for Money. Then it was that the saying of Masses
for the living and the dead, Purgatory, Indulgences,
Dispensations, Pilgrimages, Jubilees, and the like, were
introduced without measure. They had besides this, always
a watchful Eye over such as were at the point of
death, since they knew that Men were commonly not
so addicted at that time to their worldly Riches, which
they were else to leave to their Heirs who often rejoiced
at their Death: Nay, they were not ashamed to make
a profession of begging. Among other Tricks,The Policies of the Popes in the Croisade. the Popes did in the Eleventh
and the following Century turn the Croisadoes to their
great Advantage. For in these expeditions after the
People had once received the sign of the Cross to assist
in the recovery of the Holy Land, the Popes pretended
to the supreme Command and Direction; they took the
Persons and Estates of such as had received the Cross
under their particular Protection, exempting them
thereby from the Civil Jurisdiction both in Civil and
criminal Causes, and rendring their Dispensations and Indulgences
more frequent and flourishing than before;
the Pope's Legates did dispose of such Alms, Collections
and Legacies as were given for that purpose, and
under the same pretext received the Tenths from the
Clergy; nay, even pretended to put their Commands
upon Princes to receive the Cross themselves. These
they imployed afterwards against such as were declared
by them scismaticks or Hereticks, whose possessions
they used to confiscate and bestow upon those who had
proved serviceable to them, without asking the Advice
of the sovereign, who durst not but invest these with
those Countries that were presented to them by so high
a Hand. § 18. Multitude of Ecclesiasticks No less did the number of Ecclesiasticks increase
proportionably to the increase of the Riches of the
Church, because there were not wanting such as were
willing to have a share of them without taking much
pains. For it was not thought sufficient to have an
ordinary Minister, Chaplain and others necessary for
the exercising of Divine service belonging to each

Church, but also each Cathedral had a Chapter of Canons,
and there were great numbers of Persons of high
and low Quality that were forward in taking upon
them these profitable and in no ways but then some Functions,
because the inconveniency of Celibacy which the
Pope in the Eleventh and the following Century forced
upon the Ecclesiasticks not without great trouble and reluctancy
was sufficiently recompenced by the Honours
and Revenues which they enjoyed quietly in their several
stations. Besides,Fryars and Nu••. an innumerable multitude of Fryars and
Nuns settled themselves all over Christendom. This
sort of People began first to appear in the World at the
time of the great Persecutions, but in the Fourth and
following Centuries did multiply their numbers to a
prodigious degree. In the beginning they lived upon
what they could get by their Handy-work; a great
many used to give their Goods to the Poor, tho' voluntarily,
and lived under the Direction of the Bishops, according
to a Discipline prescribed in the Canons. In
the seventh Century especially, Fryars and Nuns were
much in vogue in those Western Parts, which were every
where filled up with Monasteries and Nunneries
built by the encouragement of Princes and other great
Men that endowed them with great Revenues. But
when the Charity and Liberality of the People seemed
almost to be exhausted by the great Charges bestowed
upon so many rich Monasteries, and yet there were not
enough to contain all such as were desirous to enter into
this sort of Life; at last in the Thirteenth Century the
Order of the Mendicant-Fryars was erected:Mendicants. These
made a great shew of Holiness, because they would not
be taken for such as were forward to choose a Monastick
Life to live in plenty, but for such as had taken a resolution
to bid farewel to all the Pleasures of this World,
and at the best,The Motives to embrace this manner of Life. maintain themselves by Alms. A great
many have embraced this severe Order, out of an Opinion
of a particular Holiness and Merit, which they believed
did belong to this Order, or rather an Ecclesiastick
Ambition; the Pride of Mankind being so great
and natural to some, that they did not think the Commands
of God sufficient, but rather would receive Heaven

from God Almighty as a desert than as a gift, and
were ambitious of having a preference before others,
even in the other Life. some there are who embrace a
Monastick Life out of desperation, some out of laziness. 
A great many are by their Parents and Relations sent into
a Monastery out of superstition or Poverty, and to prevent
the ruin of a Family by the division of the Estate
among a great many Children. And out of these Fryars
the Pope has chosen his Regiment of Guards, which he
lays in Garrison not only to plague the Laiety, but also to
curb the Bishops and the rest of the Clergy. It was for this
reason that the Pope did uphold the Fryars with so much
zeal against the Bishops, in the Tenth Century, especially,
when they withdrawing themselves from the Jurisdictions
of the Bishops, did submit themselves to the immediate Authority
of the Pope. And the Popes know so well how to
handle them, that tho' there are great Jealousies on foot
betwixt their several Orders, as for example, betwixt
the Franciscans and Dominicans, they nevertheless keep
so even a ballance betwixt them, and so equally dispose
of their Favours towards them, that one Order may not
oppress another, or that any of them may have any reason
to complain of the Pope's partiality. These Fryars also used to interfere often with the regular
Clergy,Prejudicial to the regular Clergy. as pretending to a great share in the Legacies
and Burials of the richer sort, to the direction of
Consciences and the administration of the sacraments. 
From hence did arise a continual envy and hatred from
the Bishops and regular Clergy against these Fryars,
who being upheld by the Pope's Favour, were not concerned
at their anger. And therefore whenever any
Bishop attempted any thing against the Pope's Authority,
these Fryars with their clamour and noise pursued him
every where like so many Hounds, and rendred him
odious to the common People, amongst whom they were
in great veneration, through their outward appearance
of Holiness; and from thence it came to pass, that the
Bishops who opposed the Pope's Authority never could
make a great Party among the common People. Besides
this, the Fryars always kept a watchful Eye over
the actions of the Bishops, giving continual advices concerning
them to their Generals residing at Rom•, whereby

by the Popes were enabled to oppose timely any design
intended against their Authority. And these Fryars
proved the main obstacle, why the Bishops could not so
effectually oppose the Pope's Authority which he assumed
over them, so that being destitute of means to help
themselves, they were forced to follow the current. Tho'
it is also certain, that some of them were very well satisfied
with it, as believing that they did participate of the
Grandeur of their supreme Head, and that thereby
they should be exempted from the Jurisdiction of the
Civil Magistrates, which was more dreadful to them than
a foreign Jurisdiction exercised by those of their own
Order, from whom they had all the reason to expect
more Favour. Nevertheless it is also undeniable, that a
great many Bishops, especially among those on this side the
Alps bear a grudge to the Pope's Authority to this very
day, which evidently appeared at the Council of Trent,
where the French and spanish Bishops did insist very
closely upon this Point, that it might be decided, whether
Bishops are not obliged to Residence by the Law of
God, which is also the Opinion of the Jansenists (as they
are called) in France and the Netherlands. The more
refined sort did easily perceive what their Intention was
by making this Proposition. For if God had commanded
them this, it must also be a consequence that he had
given them means and instructed them with sufficient
Power (qui dat jus ad finem, dat jus ad media) and
that therefore they were not obliged to go to Rome first,
and to purchase an Authority to exercise their Function. 
The Pope met with great Difficulties before he could
surmount this obstacle at the Council of Trent, wherefore
it is very likely that this will be the last Council,
since the Pope will scarce hereafter put his Grandeur to
the hazard and the decision of such an Assembly; which
also seems now to be of no further use, since the Jesuits
and some others have taught that the Pope is infallible
and above Councils, from whom they ought to receive
a confirmation, and a binding or obliging Power. But
let it be as it will, the Bishops are for their own sakes obliged
not to withdraw themselves from the Popes subjection,
since thereby they would fall under the Jurisdiction
of the Civil Power, and would be obliged to seek

for Protection from their sovereigns, who must be Potent
Princes, if they should protect them against the
Pope; wherefore they are now forced to choose the least
of two Evils. § 19. How the Church was freed from all Power over it. Tho' the Church was never so abounding in
Riches and in great numbers of Ecclesiasticks, yet was
it absolutely necessary, that the Pope if the intended to
establish an Ecclesiastical Monarchy, should not be in
any ways dependent on any Temporal Prince; and
that he should reside in a place which was free from all
subjection to any Civil Power but himself; that he also
should be possessed of such an Estate, as might be sufficient
to maintain his Grandeur, and not to be liable to
be taken away from him upon any pretence whatsoever;
where also his adherents might find a safe retreat
whenever they should be pursued by the Civil Power. 
To establish this was a business of a considerable time
and labour, neither could it be effected without great
opposition, and that by a great many Artifices and knavish
Tricks. And it is certain that as long as there was
an Emperour in the Western Empire, and as long as the
Empire of the Goths lasted in Italy, the Bishops of Rome
could not so much as think of this Greatness. How the Popes withdrew themselves from their subjction to the Emperours. But this
having been destroyed under the Emperour Justinian,
and Rome and Italy made a Province of the Grecian Empire,
then it was that the Popes took their opportunity
to exempt themselves from the Jurisdiction of these Emperours,
whose Authority was mightily decayed in Italy,
partly by the ill management of their Governours at Ravenna,
partly by their own weakness and want of strength;
for the Lombards were Masters in Italy, and in the times
of Justinian II. one Emperour was for ruining the other. 
Besides this, some of these Emperours were against the
adoring of Images, and Leo Isaurus quite ejected them
out of the Churches, because this adoration was wholly
degenerated into Idolatry, and as to the outward appearance,
the saints were more regarded than God himself. 
This undertaking was very vehemently opposed
by Pope Gregory II. who stood up for the Images, partly
because the Roman Chair found this superstition very
advantageous; partly because the Pope took it very ill

that the Emperour should undertake a Reformation in
Matters of Religion without his Knowledge and Consent,
and that at that time when he was busie to introduce
the Ecclesiastical Monarchy in the Western
parts; partly also, because he thought to have met with
an opportunity to withdraw himself from the Jurisdiction
of the Grecian Emperours. The better to obtain
his Aim, he stirred up the Romans and Italians, who hitherto
had been under the Obedience of the Emperours,
to refuse to pay them Tribute; and the Governour residing
at Ravenna, endeavouring to maintain the Emperour's
Right, was slain in a Tumult. Whereby the Jurisdiction
and Power of the Grecian Emperours was abolished
in those parts of Italy, and these Countries began
to be free and independent on any Foreign Jurisdiction. § 20. The Pope seeks for Protection in France. 
          By these means the Pope had freed himself from
the Jurisdiction of the Emperours of Constantinople, but
not long after he was threatened by another Enemy, who
being nearer at hand, was likely to prove more troublesome
to him than formerly the Emperours who lived
at so considerable a distance. For the Kings of the
Longobards endeavoured first to make themselves Masters
of those parts which were fallen off from the Emperour,
and afterwards of all Italy. They had already
taken Ra•enna, and there was none left in Italy who
was able to stop their Victories. The Popes were then
hard put to it, and knew not where to seek for Protection
except of the Kings of France, who at first endeavoured
to finish these Differences by an amicable
Composition, but the Longobards not being willing to
rest satisfied therewith, they resolved by force of Arms to
maintain the Italian Affairs. They were easily prevailed
upon to undertake this Business, not only because
Pope Zachary had approved of the Proceedings of Pepin,
who having abdicated the lawful King, was from a
Grand-Marshal become King of France; but also they
had thereby an opportunity offered them to make Conquests
in Italy, whereof the French Nation has been always
very ambitious. Pepin and afterwards Charles the
Great, having been so Fortunate in their Wars against

the Longobards, as to Conquer their whole Kingdom;
they gave to the Papal Chair all that Tract of Land
which had been formerly under the Jurisdiction of the
Grecian Governours. There are some who are of Opinion,
that to obtain this Gift, the Pope made use of the
fictitious Donation of Constantine the Great, which in
those barbarous times was easily imposed upon the
ignorant World. Besides this, the French Kings had
great Obligations to the Pope for the above-mentioned
reason, and were also fond of acquiring the name of
pious Princes, by bestowing liberal Presents out of other
Mens Possessions. For it was in those Days a common
Custom, that Men of all degrees made it their Business
to out-do one another in Liberality towards the Clergy. 
Nay, the Princes used to grant them these Possessions
without any incumbrances, that thereby the Ecclesiasticks
might be sure to enjoy free possession of what they
had bestowed upon them. These extravagant Donations
were none of the least Causes why the Clergy afterwards
did labour with so much vehemency to withdraw
themselves from the Jurisdiction of the Civil Magistrates,
as fearing that these extravagant Donations and Grants
might be recalled and declared void by their successours. 
Wherefore it has been always a Maxim of Wise Men. 
that Princes by granting extravagant Priviledges and
Gifts, made their subjects rather Jealous than Friends;
since those who have obtained them, living always in fear
that the same either in part or wholly, may be taken
away again, imploy all means so to establish themselves
as to be in a capacity to maintain themselves therein in
spite of the Prince. Those Learned Men who are of
an impartial Judgment, take it for granted, that the Pope
did pretend to exercise a sovereign Power over these
Countries granted to him by the French Kings, but that
the People refused the same, as being for maintaining
their Liberty; and thinking it very odd, that the Pope
who was an Ecclesiastical Person, should pretend to be
also a Worldly Prince. When therefore the Romans
mutinied against Pope Leo III. he was forced to seek
for Assistance from Charles the Great, who restored the
Pope. But on the other hand, the Pope and People of
Rome proclaimed Charles Emperour, whereby he was

put into possession of the sovereignty over that part of
Italy, which formerly belonged to the Jurisdiction of the
Governours at Ravenna, and the other remnants of the
Western Empire; so that the Pope afterwards enjoyed
these Countries under the sovereign Jurisdiction of the
Emperour, who therefore used to be called the Patron
and Defender of the Church, till the Reign of the Emperour
Henry IV. § 21. The Pope withdraws himself from the Obedience of the Emperours, and establishes an Ecclesiastical sovereignty. But the Popes began at length to grow weary
of the Imperial Protection, because the Emperour's Consent
was required in the Election of a Pope, and if they
were mutinous, the Emperours used to check them, and
sometimes turn them out of the Chair. To exempt
themselves from this Power of the Emperours over them,
the Popes have for a long time together imployed all
their Cunning and Labour before they could obtain
their Aim. They used to make it their constant Business
to raise intestine Commotions against the Emperours,
sometimes in Germany, sometimes in Italy, thereby
to diminish their Power and Authority. The Bishops,
especially in Germany, were always very busie, as being
dissatisfied that they were dependent on the Emperours,
who nominated the Bishops, and therefore joyned with
the Pope to assist him in setting up the Ecclesiastical sovereignty. 
The Reign of the Emperour Henry IV. furnished
them with an opportunity to put in execution their
Design, this Emperour by his Debaucheries and ill management
of Affairs, living in discontents and continual
broils with the Estates of Germany; and as soon as
Gregory VII. who was before called Hildebrand, a proud,
resolute and obstinate Man got into the Chair, he began
to exclaim against the Emperour, that the granting of
Church-Benefices did not belong to him, since he made
a Traffick with them, and sold them to all sorts of
People whom he installed before they had taken Holy
Orders. Pope Gregory excommunicates Hen IV. And when the Emperour resolved to maintain
his antient Right and Title, he excommunicated him,
and stirred up the Bishops and the Estates of Germany
against him, who made him so much work, that he
was obliged to resign his Right of Constituting of Bishops. 
The Pope under this pretext, did not only intend

to exempt the Bishops from the Emperour's Jurisdiction,
but the main point was to make himself sovereign
over Italy, and to make all the other Princes submit
to the Pope's Authority. And some are of Opinion,
that this Design might have been put in execution, considering
that Europe was at that time divided into so
many Principalities, and most of these Princes being
not very Potent, might either out of a Devotion,
or to avoid falling under the Jurisdiction of more Potent
Princes, submit themselves under the Pope's protection
and pay him Tribute. It is therefore not improbable,
that if three or four Popes had succeeded one
another, instructed with sufficient Capacity to cover
their Design with the Cloak of Holiness, and in the
mean while to uphold the Interest of the People against
the Oppressions of their Princes, the Popes might have
made themselves absolute sovereigns both in Temporal
and spiritual Affairs. Neither did the Pope only pretend to free himself
from the Emperour's Jurisdiction over him,The Pope endeavours to subject the Emperour. but also endeavoured
to make him his subject; for he pretended
to be his Judge, he summoned him before him to make
answer to the Complaints of his subjects, excommunicated
him, and declared him to have forfeited his Right
and Title to the Empire. And tho' his son, the Emperour
Henry V. did endeavour to recover what was forcibly
taken away from his Father, and made Pope
Paschal a Prisoner, whom he forced to restore to him the
right of Constituting of Bishops, yet were the whole
Clergy in Europe so dissatisfied hereat, and raised such
Commotions,1122. that at last he was obliged to resign the
same again into the Pope's hands. Much about the same time there were great Disputes
concerning this Point in England,
         Disputes in England about the investiture of B•shops. which were composed
in such a manner, that the King should not pretend
to the Power of investing of Bishops, but that these
should do Homage to him. 1107. The last of which the Pope
was very unwilling to grant, who would fain have had
the Bishops to be quite independent of the King, which
was the reason why he expresly forbid the Bishops in
France to follow this Example; but King Lewis VI. and
his successours did maintain their Right with so high a

Hand, that the Popes were never able to establish their
pretended Right in France. Neither did the Popes
think it advisable to fall out at once with the Emperour
and France, but that it would be more secure to have
one at hand to uphold them against the other; especially,
the Popes were not so much for weakening of France,
because they were not so nearly concerned with that
Kingdom, as for humbling the Emperours that were Potent
in Italy, and pretended to the sovereignty over the
City of Rome. Neither was Germany so intirely united
as France, and most Princes of Europe being then very
jealous of the Grandeur of the Empire, were very willing
to joyn with the Pope against the Emperours, under
pretence of upholding the Authority of the Holy Church
and Papal Chair. 'Tis true, the two Emperours Frederick
I. and II. did afterwards endeavour to restore
the antient Imperial Right, but were not able to attain
their aim, especially since Italy was divided into
the two Factions of the Guelfs and Gibellines, the first
whereof were for the Pope, the latter for the Emperour,
which caused such a Confusion in Italy, that the Emperours
could never afterwards reduce Italy to an entire
Obedience. And because after the death of the Emperour
Frederick II. the whole Empire was during that
long vacancy of the Throne, put into great Confusion
and Disorders, the succeeding Emperours found so much
work in Germany, that they were not in a Condition
to look after Italy, whereby the Pope had sufficient leisure
given him to make himself sovereign both as to
his own Person, and over the Possessions belonging to the
Church of Rome. 
        § 22. The Pope pr•tends to a Power over Princes even to depose them. But the Pope not being contended to have attained
this degree of Grandeur, quickly set on foot another
Doctrine, which was of far greater consequence, viz. 
That the Pope had an indirect Power over Princes, that
it belonged to him in his own Right to take Care how
they governed and managed their Affairs. For tho'
they did not expresly pretend in gross terms that Princes
did depend on them in Civil Affairs, yet they believed
that the supreme Ecclesiastical Power did entitle them
to an Authority to judge concerning the Actions of

Princes, whether the same were good or bad, to admonish
them, to correct them, and to command what was
fitting, and to forbid what was unfitting to be done. 
If therefore Princes waged War against one another,
the Pope pretended to have an Authority to command
a Truce to be made betwixt them, to bring their Differences
before him, and refer them to his Decision, not
without threatnings that he would not only excommunicate
them in their Persons, but also forbid the exercise
of Divine service and administration of the sacraments
throughout their whole Kingdom. They also did
believe it belonged to their Office to obviate all publick
scandals, to defend such as were oppressed, and to see
Justice done to all the World. It was from this
pretension, that they received the Complaints of all such
as pretended to be oppressed; nay, they went further,
for they sometimes took information concerning the Injuries
done by Princes to their subjects, and concerning
some Impositions laid upon the People, whereby the
People thought themselves aggrieved, which they forbid
to be levied upon them under the penalty of Excommunication. 
sometimes they used to declare the Possessions
of such as were excommunicated, forfeited, exposing
their Persons to danger, and releasing the subjects from
their Oaths of Allegiance, under pretence that the Government
of a Christian People ought not to be trusted
to the management of such as had rebelled against the
Church. This has been attempted against a great many
Crowned Heads, and put in execution against some of
them. This abominable pretension (as they perswade the ignorant)
was founded upon their fictitious Decretals upon
which they have built their Canon-Law,How they colour over this Power. which
grants to the Pope an unlimited Power over Christians,
by vertue of which, he may as the Common Father,
send out his Commands to all Believers, and admonish
them concerning all such Matters as belong to Religion
and their salvation, and in case of Disobedience,
lay punishments upon them. For that the Predecessours
of Gregory VII. did not make use of this Power (they
say) was because the preceeding Emperours, either kept
themselves within their bounds, or else the Popes lived an

ungodly Life. To give specious colours to these pretensions,
they made use of the Examples of Ambrose and
Theodosius; they used to relate how the spanish Bishops
had obliged King Wamba by way of penance to lay
down the Crown: As also, how the Bishops of France
had deposed Lewis surnamed the Pious, who afterwards
could not recover his Crown without the
Consent and Authority of another Assembly of Bishops. 
They alledged for another Example, how Fulco then
Archbishop of Rheims had threatened Charles sirnamed
the simple, to absolve his subjects from their Oaths
of Allegiance, if he made an Alliance with the Normans,
who were then Pagans. They supposed that it was without
question, that the Pope's Power did extend it self beyond
that of all other Bishops, since it was not limited
by any thing, except by the express Canons of Councils
and Decrees of the Popes, wherein nothing was
contained against this Power of deposing of Kings; and
(they say) it was not to be supposed that they could
have been forgetful of this point. And because they had
assumed a Power to give the Name and Title of a King
to some who either prompted by their Ambition or superstition
had begged the same from them, they supposed
that by the same Right, they might take away the Crown
from such as they esteemed unworthy of wearing it. They also had forbid to marry within the seventh degree
of Consanguinity, and the fourth of Affinity, whereby
they often met with an opportunity to be troublesome
to Princes: For because it seldom happened among
those of so high a Rank, but that one side or other
was within one of these degrees, they stood in
continual fear lest the Pope should disturb their Negotiations,
except they humbly begged for a Dispensation;
and in both cases the Popes knew how to make their advantage
of them. Lastly, the Popes having abundance
of Business to dispatch, did thereby draw the best and
most refined Wits to their Courts, who used to go thither
to look for Imployment, and to perfect themselves
in the great school of Europe. These were always for
promoting the Pope's Interest and Designs, from whom
they expected their promotion; besides that, the whole
Clergy did adhere to him as to their supreme Head. 

Pope Boniface VIII. did clearly give us to understand
his meaning at the Jubilee kept in the year 1300. when
he appeared sometimes in the Habit of an Emperour,
sometimes in that of a Pope, and caused two swords to
be carried before him as the Ensigns of the Ecclesiastical
and Civil Power. § 23. The Papal Authority opposed. But the Popes could not long enjoy this unsufferable
Usurpation in quiet, for it was so often called
in question, till they were obliged to draw in their horns,
and to make their pretensions a little more plausible. 'Tis
true, in the Business with the Emperours, the Henrys and
the Fredericks, they got the upper hand; nevertheless,
they met betwixt while often times with very indifferent
entertainment, and such things were sometimes published
against them as were little to their Honour, and from
whence it might easily be judged by those that were impartial,
that not the Glory of God, but their own Grandeur
was the chief aim of their undertaking. But when
Boniface III. pretended to play the same Game with
Philip surnamed the Handsome, King of France, he watched
his opportunity so well, and gave him such a blow, that
the Pope felt the smart of it. And to avoid the scandal
which the common People might take at these so severe
proceedings against the Pope, use was made of this
pretext, that what was done against his Person, was
not intended against the Vicar of Jesus Christ, but against
a pernicious Person, who by unlawful means was got
into the Chair, and that a general Council ought to be
called to free the Church from his Oppressions. But the ensuing schisms have proved the most pernicious
to the Popes Authority,The schisms much weakned their Power. as also the double Elections
which have been made at several times, when the Cardinals
being divided, set up two Popes at once, who
used by turns to excommunicate and revile one another,
and to maintain themselves in the Chair, were fain to
flatter the Kings, and acknowledge that they were beholding
to them. This Division was an evident sign, that
the Elections of these Popes had not been guided by the
Holy spirit, but been influenced by some ill Designs
and Intrigues. Wherefore it was also the Opinion of
the Wiser sort, that in such a case, neither of them ought

to be acknowledged as Pope, but that a new one ought
to be chosen, which was also put in execution at the
Council of Constance. The first schism arose, according
to my Opinion in the year 1134. or as some will have it
1130. when after the death of Honorius II. Innocent II. and
Anacletus were both chosen Popes. And tho' the first
had the greater party on his side, yet did the King of
sicily and Duke of Aquitam, vigorously uphold the latter;
and his adherents did after his death choose another in
his stead, who called himself Victor, with whom Innocent
made an agreement, so that he voluntarily relinquished his
pretension, and acknowledged him his superiour. But
after the death of Adrian IV. two Popes were again elected
at one time, viz. Alexander III. and Victor IV. To
the first adhered France, England, and sicily; to the latter,
the Emperour Frederick I. all Germany and the Clergy of
Rome And after his death, those of his party chosen three
successive Popes, all whom Alexander out-lived. These
used to make a common Trade to excommunicate and
revile one another, and each of them were fain to behave
themselves towards their Protectours, more like a
Client than a Master. But much greater was the schism
after the death of Gregory IX. when again two Popes
were elected at once, whereof one resided at Rome,
the other at Avignon. This schism lasted through several
successions, near the space of Forty Years; during
which time, both parties excommunicated one another
very frequently, and committed great Cruelties. France,
scotland, Castile, savoy and Naples, were of the side of
the Pope that resided at Avignon, but all the rest of Christendom
declared for the other at Rome. Both parties
took great pains to set out the great numbers of saints
that were of their party, and what Miracles and Revelations
were made concerning their approbation. And
both sides knew how to produce such Reasons, that at
last, there was no other remedy left them but to force both
the Anti-Popes to abdicate themselves at the Council of
Constance, and to choose a new one in their stead. The
last schism of all arose when the Council of Basil having
deposed Eugenius IV. 1433. did in his stead elect Felix V. 
Pope, unto whom the former would not submit. And
these Dissentions were continued till after the death of

         Eugenius, when Nicholas V. was chosen in his stead, unto
whom Felix for quiet sake, did resign the Chair upon
very advantageous terms in the year 1488. It is very easily to be imagined how these Divisions
did expose to publick view the secrets of these Fathers. Hence an occasion taken to bridle the Popes Power by general Councils. 
since from hence an opportunity was taken to
make use of the Assistance of the Councils to bridle the
Popes, and from the Popes to appeal to these which
were now made use of to terrify the Popes withal, whenever
they pretended to transgress their bounds. The
Popes could the less refuse to acknowledge the Power of
the Councils at that time, because Gregory VII. himself
after the quarrel betwixt him and the Emperour was
renewed, had proposed to call a Council to be held in a
place of security, where both Friends and Foes, both
the Clergy and Laiety might meet, to judge whether he
or the Emperour had broke the Peace, and to concert
Measures how to re-establish the same. Gelasius II. who
had Differences with Henry V. made the same Declaration,
adding withal, that he would rest satisfied
with what Judgment his Brothers the Bishops should give
who were constituted Judges in the Church by God
Almighty, and without whom, he could not decide a
Business of this nature. so Innocent III. had writ, that
he would not undertake to decide the Marriage Controversie
betwixt Philip Augustus and Engebourgh of Denmark
without consulting a general Council; for if he
should attempt any such thing, he might thereby forfeit
his Office and Dignity. Which words seemed intimate,
that a Pope for mismanagement might be deposed. And
when afterwards these and the like words were made
use of against the Popes, it was then too late to endeavour
to make them pass for Compliments; since it proves
often dangerous to be too modest in matters of such
consequence. Wherefore the Council of Pisa in the year
1409. did depose the two Anti-Popes, Benedict XII and
Gregory XII. in whose stead they chose another, viz. 
Alexander V. In the same manner the Council of Constance
did not only confirm the deposition of these two
Popes, but also turned out John XXIV. who was made
Pope after the death of Alexander V. In the same
manner the Council of Basil did with Eugenius IV. and

besides this made a Decree that neither at the Court of
Rome, neither in other places any mony should be taken
for the dispatches of Ecclesiastical Affairs. All which
as it shook the very Foundation of the Papal Chair, so
it was not to be admired that the Popes were very
averse afterwards to call the Council of Trent, and
were forced to make use of all their cunning, that nothing
might pass there to the prejudice of their Grandeur,
and that since that time they have bid farewel to Councils
for ever. §. Concerning the seat of the Popes being transferred to Avignon. 
          24. Among other divisions, this has proved very
prejudicial (as it seems) to the Authority of the Popes,
that Clement V. did transfer the Papal Chair from Rome
to Avignon, as I suppose, upon instigation of Philip surnamed
the Handsom, King of France, who having had
great differences with Boniface VIII. was Excommunicated
by him. To render this ineffectual, he thought
it the most proper way if the Pope resided in France,
and that thereby the like would be prevented for the
future; since it was very probable that the greatest part
of the Cardinals hereafter would be taken out of the
French Nation. The Popes made this City their constant
place of Residence for seventy years together, not
to mention that some of the Anti-Popes also did Reside
there. This changing of the seat carried along with it
several inconveniencies, which proved very prejudicial
to the Ecclesiastical Monarchy. For the Pope's Authority
was among other things also founded upon this belief,
that s. Peter had been at Rome, and by his presence
had Communicated a particular Prerogative and Holiness
to that Chair, and whether the same could be transferred
to Avignon seemed somewhat doubtful to a great
many; besides this, the Pope was then for the most
part obliged to comply with France, and to live as it
were at the Discretion of the French Kings. Tho also
the French, who then thought they had a great Catch,
have since complained, that they got little else by the
presence of the Roman Court than simony, and another
abominable Vice not fit to be named. Besides this
the Court of Rome being then kept among strangers,
as it were, out of its Natural Element its Faults were

the sooner discovered, and the whole the more despised. 
This removal also of the Court of Rome proved very
prejudicial to the Revenue of the Church in Italy. For
after the Authority of the Emperors in Italy came to decay,
each state was for living free, and being sovereign
itself, and the Factions of the Guelfs and Gibellines
caused most horrid distractions. And the Authority of
the Pope being vanished by his absence, they made bold
with the Church Possessions. Most Cities of the Ecclesiastical
state upon the persuasions of the Florentines
had sent away the Popes Legats, and acknowledged no
sovereign. The Emperor Lewis, surnamed the Bavarian,
who was at Enmity with the Pope, but in
great esteem among the Inhabitants of the Ecclesiastical
state, did pretend to the sovereignty over the same, as
being a Fief of the Empire, which he granted to such
as upheld his Party against the Pope. The Patrimony
of the Church was then but very slender, and tho the
Popes recovered part of it afterwards, they were obliged
to leave most in Possession of what they had got. But
the City of Rome was nevertheless at last forced to submit
to the Popes power, which it had resisted so long,
when Boniface IX. in the year 1393. put on the Bridle,
by building the Castle of s. Angelo. And Alexander VI. 
was the chief cause that the Ecclesiastical state was reduced
under the Obedience of the Popes. This Pope
had a Natural son, whose name was Caesar Borgia, but
who commonly is called Duke of Valence, from the
Dukedom of Valence, which he got with his Lady
Charlotte d' Albret. The Pope being very ambitious to
make this his son a great Prince in Italy, proposed this
expedient to him, that he must drive out these petty
Lords, which were then in Possession of the Ecclesiastical
state, and when he had made himself Master of these
places, he would confirm him in the Possession of them
for ever. He succeeded very well in this Enterprise,
having made away with most of these petty Lords, some
by Force, some by Treachery; for he used to stick at
nothing, alledging, that whatever he did could not be
done amiss, since he had received his Commission from
his Father, who was endowed with the Holy Ghost. 
And being reduced to the utmost want of mony, wherewith

to pay his soldiers, he and his Father agreed to
Poison the richest Cardinals at a Feast intended for that
purpose; some of whom they also knew to be averse
to their Designs. But the servant who had the management
of the business having out of carelesness filled the
Pope and his son a Cup out of the Poisoned Flasks,
the Father died immediately, the son narrowly escaping
by the help of some sudorificks. And not being able
so to influence the next Election, as to get one chosen
fit for his purpose, the whole design of Caesar Borgia
came to nothing. Tho after the death of Pius III. 
who sate but a few Weeks in the Papal Chair, Julius
III. a most mortal Enemy of Borgia was chosen in
his stead, who having taken into his Possession all what
he had got before, banished him out of the Country. 
Neither did this Pope rest satisfied, till he had recovered
all what formerly belonged to the Church, (except Ferrara
which was not reunited with the Papal Chair,
till about the latter end of the last Age, when the Legitimate
Race of the Dukes of Esté was extinct. This
Pope also prevented the French from becoming Masters
of Italy. 
        §. Luther gives a great blow to the Grandeur of the Pope. 25. But when the Ecclesiastical Monarchy seemed
to be come to the very Pinacle of its Grandeur, when all
the Western parts were either in Communion with, or
in Obedience to the Church of Rome, except some few
Remnants of the Waldenses in France, and of the Hussites
in Bohemia, and when just the differences arisen
betwixt Pope Julius II. and Lewis XII. which easily
might have occasioned another schism, were after the
death of the first happily Composed by Leo X. and all
the complaints against the Ambition of the Court of
Rome were almost extinguished, there was such a Revolt
made from the Chair of Rome, first raised upon a
very indifferent occasion, that a great part of Europe
withdrew itself from the Obedience of the Pope, who
was thereby put in danger of losing all. We will in
this, as we have done in all other matters, only relate
how far human Counsels and helps were concerned
therein. For the hidden Counsels and Works of God
Almighty, ought in our judgment rather to be received

with admiration and a submission, than to be
dived into with presumption. And what Tacitus says,
in a certain place, may conveniently be applyed here:
Abdi•'s numinis sensus exquirere illicitum, anceps, nec
ideo assequare, i. e. To search into the hidden designs of
God is unlawful, uncertain, nor are they to be penetrated
by us. Pope Leo of the House of de Medicis was an affable,The Vertues and Faults of Leo. 
         
and magnificent Man, very liberal towards all honest
and learned Men, who might have made a very good
Pope, if he had but had an indifferent knowledge of
Religion, and an inclination to Piety, whereas he was
very careless of both. He having lived very splendidly,
and by his Liberality and Magnificence exhausted the
Apostolical Chamber, and not being acquainted with
the Arts of acquiring Riches, made use of the Cardinal
Laurence Puccius, who at last, when all the other Gold
Mines were emptied, proposed the way of raising mony
by Indulgences. These Indulgences were therefore sent
abroad all over Christendom, both for the dead and the
living, Eggs, Milk, and the like were allowed to be
eaten on fast days. The several sums of mony thereby
to be raised, were beforehand assigned to certain uses;
All what was to be Collected in saxony and thereabout,
as far as to the sea side, having been granted to
Magdalen the Pope's sister; she to make the best of the
Pope's Grant, had committed the whole management
of her share to one Arcimbold a Bishop by his Title and
Coat; but who was most experienced in all the Genoese
Tricks of Merchandising. He again employed such as
did proffer the most, and had no other prospect than
the getting of mony. It had been formerly a Custom
in saxony that the Hermits of the Order of s. Austin
used to proclaim the Indulgences. But Arcimbold's Commissioners,
did not think fit to trust them at this time,
as knowing them to be expert in that Trade, and fearing
that they might not deal fairly with them, or at
least that they might not bring in more mony than used
to be gathered at other times. They chose therefore
the Dominicans to Preach up the Indulgences, which
the Austin Friers took very ill, as being thereby defrauded
of their Authority, Right and Profit. The

         Dominicans in the mean while, to show themselves well
qualified for this new Employment, did magnifie their
Ware to that extravagant degree, that their Auditors
were extremely scandalized at it; especially since the
Commissioners lived in continual debaucheries, and spent
with great infamy, what the poor Country Fellows
spared out of their Bellies, to redeem their sins. This
obliged Luther,
         Luther opposes Indulgences. a Frier of the Hermits Order of s. Austin,
to oppose these impudent Merchants of Indulgences;
and having duely weighed the matter with himself,
he in the year 1517. did affix 95. Theses concerning
this Point at Wittenbergh, and John Tezel, a Dominican
Frier, published some other Theses in opposition
to those, at Franckfort. Thus the Dispute
having been set on foot, each of them began to enlarge
himself upon the abovementioned Theses. But
Luther having upon his side both Reason and scripture,
his Adversary had nothing to alledge for himself, but the
Authority of the Pope and the Church. Wherefore
Luther was obliged to make an enquiry,Afterwards the Popes Power. upon what
Foundation the Authority of the Pope was built, and
in what condition the Church was at that time; which
led him by degrees unto the discovery of the Errors and
Abuses, which were crept into the Church, and to
an invective against the Impostures, and scandalous
lives of the Monks and Priests, and that it was a duty
incumbent upon the Magistrates to abolish these Abuses. 
And to this purpose, as also to oblige the Magistrates
to uphold his Doctrine, he spoke very magnificently concerning
the Nature and Grandeur of the Civil Power,
which the Priests hitherto had represented as despicable. 
By which means he at first got a great Party, and his
Doctrine was spread abroad every where. §. The Circumstances of these times. 26. But that we may the better understand the
Reason, why a Poor Frier was able to give such a blow
to the Chair of Rome, we must, next to the supreme
Direction of God Almighty, consider the circumstances
of these times, and what disposition there was at that
juncture of time in the minds of the People in General. 
First then, Luther's Propositions concerning the
Indulgences were very good and reasonable, and a great

many Divines, which afterwards opposed his Doctrine,
were at first of his side, as were also some Cardinals,
and George Duke of saxony himself. His Adversaries
were so perverse, that every body lamented their folly
and perverseness. Neither was it at first in the least
suspected, that things would go so far as they did. Luther
himself had at first not the least thoughts of falling
off from the Pope. The Emperor Maximilian had
no aversion to the Doctrine of Luther, and it is credibly
related, that, when he first heard of him, he did
say; that this Frier ought to be kept safe, since good
use might be made of him. some Monks only, and
these Commissioners, who were likely to be the losers
by it, did make such a clamour, and raised such tumults
by blowing up the Coals, that this small spark
broke out into a great Flame. Whole Christendom was
also in a miserable condition, it being quite overwhelmed
with Ceremonies; the perverse Monks, did
what they pleased, and had entangled tender Consciences
in their snares. All Divinity was turned into sophistry
New Doctrines and Propositions were broached,
without any regard, how they ought to be proved
and maintained. And the whole Clergy of all degrees
had rendred their Lives and Conversations odious
and despised to the World. The late Popes Alexander
VI. and Julius II. had been infamous for their
Pride, Treachery, turbulent spirit, and other such like
Vices, as were very ill becoming Ecclesiastical persons. 
such Bishops as were fit for something had quite entangled
themselves in worldly business; a great many
of them led a most scandalous Life, and were more expert
in Hunting, than skilled in the Bible. The Priests
and Monks were over Head and Ears in Ignorance, and
scandalized the Common People by their Debaucheries,
and their Avarice was grown unsupportable to every
body. Besides all this,The Ignorance of Luther's Adversaries. those who first pretended to oppose
Luther, were a sort of simple, miserable, and some of
them debauched wretches; these, when they saw Luther
maintain his Arguments in a manner which was not
common at that time, were soon confounded and put
to a nonplus, not knowing where to begin or to end. 

'Tis true, in former Ages also the Clergy had not been
free from Vices, but the Ignorance of those barbarous
times had served them for a Cloak. But after Europe
began to be restored to its flourishing condition, and all
sorts of Learning began to dispel the former darkness,
it was then that these abominable spots became more
conspicuous to the Eyes of the World. As the ignorant
Priests and Monks, who could not bear the
glance of this bright shining Light, were stark mad at
those who had restored Learning to Europe, and did
them all the mischief they could, and when they found
themselves worsted by them, used to make a Point of
Religion of their different Disputes, and to accuse those
of Heresie that were more Learned than themselves:
so these used to expose their folly, and as much as in
them lay to discover their Ignorance to the World. 
'Twas upon this account, the impudent Monks picked
a quarrel with John Reuchlin, whom they fain would
have made a Heretick; from whence that learned Gentleman
Ʋlrick van Hutten (if I remember right) took an
opportunity to expose them most miserably in Epistolis
obscurorum virorum. Whilst the War betwixt the Lovers
and the Persecutors of Learning was carried on with great
heat on both sides, Luther's Doctrine appeared in the
World. And because the Monks made it their business
to bring the most learned Men into the same Quarrel
which they had against Luther, in hopes to strike them
both down at one blow, this proved the occasion that
most of the learned Men in Germany did actually side
with Luther. 
         Erasmus favoured Luther. 
        It is also undeniable that Erasmus of Rotterdam
had a considerable share in the Reformation, for he
had before already discovered, and reprehended a great
many Abuses and Errors, he had rejected the school
Divinity, and recommended the reading of the Bible
and Fathers: he had ridiculed the Barbarity and Ignorance,
which was upheld by the Monks, and approved
at first Luther's Cause, tho he always excepted
against his violent and biting way of writing. His silence
alone proved very mischievous to Luther's Adversaries. 
For Erasmus being then esteemed the most learned
Divine of his Age, every body took his silence for a

kind of an approbation of Luther's Cause. And when
he afterwards published his Treatise de libero Arbitrio,
it made no great impression upon the minds
of the People, since it sufficiently appeared, that
it was rather writ to please others, than of his own inclination. 
Besides that this was not the main Point
in dispute, and Luther did refute sufficiently his Propositions. The Princes and Estates of Germany also having been
sufficiently convinced,The Princes of Germany dissatisfied with the Pope. that heavy Impositions had been
laid upon them of late under several pretences by the
Court of Rome, for no other purpose but to maintain the
Grandeur of the Ecclesiasticks at Rome, were extremely
dissatisfied with the Pope. The general fear which was
then in Germany of an Invasion by the Turks, and the
differences arisen betwixt Charles V. Francis I. and
Henry VIII. did greatly promote the Reformation,
since there was but little time for to think much of
these Disputes. some are of Opinion, that Charles V. 
did connive at the spreading of the Doctrine of Luther
throughout Germany, hoping by these Divisions to
get an opportunity to suppress the antient Liberty of
the Estates, and to make himself sovereign over Germany. 
For else (they say) he might easily have quenshed
the Fire at first, viz. in the year 1521. when he had
Luther in his power at Wormes, where he might have
secured him, which would have passed well enough for
a state Trick. But it is not so evident, whether, tho
Luther had been murthered against the Publick Faith
granted him, thereby his Doctrine would have been
rooted out; it is more probable that the Emperor, being
then but young, did not at that time foresee of what
Consequence this business might prove afterwards; and
that he did not think it advisable at that juncture of
time to break with the Elector of saxony, who was
then in great Authority. Neither could he pretend at
the same time, when he was engaged in a War against
France and the Turks, to attack the Princes of Germany
that were then courted by Francis, and who began to
make Alliances with them. Yet it is certain that under
the pretence of Religion he afterwards made War
upon the Protestant Estates of Germany, and intended

by their ruin to open himself the way to the Absolute
Monarchy over Germany. And tho he was very succesful
in the War against the League made at smalkald,
nevertheless he could not accomplish his projected design,
because he stood in need of the assistance of the
German Princes against France, and the Turks, and to
obtain the Imperial Crown for his son Philip. Nay
Paul III. himself dreaded the growing greatness of the
Emperor, to that degree that he stirred up the French to
oppose his prevailing Power, and to prevent the entire
ruine of the Protestants, allowed them to make use of
the Alliance with the Turks against the Emperor, who
he feared intended a thorough Reformation of the Court
of Rome. 
        And besides all this the ill Conduct of the Pope did
great mischief to the Roman Catholick Party. The ill Conduct of Leo and Cardinal Cajetan. 
          For it
was a grand mistake in Leo X. that he with so much violence
declared himself for these Merchants of Indulgences,
and by his Bull of the 9. of November in the
year 1518. decided the Points in Controversie betwixt
them, whereby he cut of all hopes and means for an
Accommodation. It would questionless have been better
for him to have stood Neuter, and to have imposed
silence upon both Parties, and in the mean while to have
found out an expedient to appease Luther. And Cardinal
Cajetan did in the year 1519. act a very imprudent
Part at Augsburgh, when he dealt so very rudely
with Luther, and refused to accept of his Proposal, viz. 
that he would be silent, provided his Adversaries would
do the same. For by this refusal made to so resolute a
Man, whom he would have obliged to make a Recantation,
he forced him to do his utmost, and to fall directly
upon the Pope himself. It would have been no
difficult matter to have granted him, that some corrupted
Manners were crept into the Church, to keep him from
meddling with the Reformation of the Doctrines. But
on the contrary, the Pope making continual instances at
the Elector of saxony's Court, to have Luther delivered
up to him, Luther was thereby obliged, to show the
unreasonableness of the Pope, and to demonstrate that
his own Doctrine was built upon a very solid and good
Foundation. And the Pope rendred his Cause very

suspicious, that he, when Luther appealed to a Council,
did by making a great many evasions protract to call
one: From hence it was evident that he did not trust
much to the goodness of his Cause, if it were to be debated
before impartial Judges. It was also an unlucky
hit for the Pope, when he fell out with Henry VIII. 
who to spite the Pope, did open the Door for the Protestant
Religion to be settled in England. Likewise did
those of the House of Navarre propagate and protect
the Protestant Religion in France, out of a hatred, as
some say, against the Pope, who had shown the way to
Ferdinand the Catholick into that Kingdom. Besides
this there were abundance of good Men of the Roman
Catholick Religion, who were glad to see that Luther
did wash the scabby Heads of the Monks with so
strong a Lye, as he did. so that every thing seemed
to concur to promote the Decree of God Almighty. §. Why the Doctrine of Luther was not spread farther. 27. But, why the Doctrine of Luther was not
spread farther, and the Ecclesiastical Monarchy was not
quite overturned, several Reasons may be alledged. 
First it is to be considered, that, in those states, where
Luther's Doctrine was received, the supreme Direction
in Ecclesiastical Affairs became necessarily to be devolved
on the Civil Magistrates. For if any one of
these states would have pretended to this Direction
over the others of the same Communion, these, who
would have thought themselves no less capable, would
never have acknowledged the same. Which did not a
little weaken their Union and strength, and was the
main occasion, that they could not act so unanimously
and vigorously against the Pope, as he against them. 
It is also to be considered, that this Reformation was
not undertaken after mature deliberation, and as it were
on purpose to form or set up a new state; but this great
Revolution happened upon a sudden and unexpectedly,
so that the whole Work was carried on as occasion
offered and by degrees. And tho Luther was the first,
that gave the Alarm, yet the rest did not think themselves
obliged to follow precisely his Opinion, but were
also ambitious of having contributed something towards
the Reformation. This occasioned Disputes among

themselves,Divisions among the Protestants. and because no body had an Authority among
them, to decide these Controversies, each Party
persisted obstinately in their Opinion; from whence
arose such a schism, that they became neglectful of
the Common Enemy, and fell upon one another. This
furnished the Popish Party with a very probable Argument,
who cried out aloud the Hereticks were faln into
Confusion among themselves, as not knowing what to
believe; and since they had left the Church of Rome,
they were brought into an endless Labyrinth. There
were also a great many of the Protestants, who under
pretext of the Gospel did lead an impious and scandalous
life,The Licenciousness of some Protestants. as if by the Liberty of the Gospel they had
obtained a License to abandon themselves to all sorts
of Vices. This gave also occasion to the Papists to
defame the Doctrine of Luther; especially since he had
with great severity reproved the licenciousness of the
Clergy, and had been generally applauded for it. It
also proved very mischievous to Luther's Doctrine, that
immediately after whole swarms of Fanaticks, Anabaptists
and the like appeared in the World, and that
the Boors in Germany run as it were mad, and made a
most dangerous Insurrection. When some Princes took
this Point into Consideration, the Doctrine of Luther
began to become suspicious to them, as if thereby the
licenciousness of the Common People was Taught and
Authorised; which they looking upon as a greater
Evil, than what oppression they were likely to suffer
from the Clergy, did with all their Power oppose the
Doctrine of Luther. 
        There are some who will have it,The University of Paris. 
          that the University
of Paris also had a share in this. For Luther having
persuaded himself, that this University was dissatisfied
at Leo X. because he had abolished the Pragmatick
sanction, concerning the Elections of Bishops; and
that therefore the Members thereof would be glad of an
opportunity to revenge themselves, he submitted his
Disputation with Eckius to their Judgment; but these
gave their Judgment against him, and that in very hard
words. The Kings of spain also did afterwards consider
that it was for their purpose to take upon them the
protection of the Roman Chair; wherefore they opposed

the Protestant Doctrine with all their might, and so
powerfully assisted the League in France, that Henry IV. 
if he would maintain his Crown, was obliged to leave
the Protestant Religion. some also have observed;Zwinglius and Calvin. that when Zwinglius, and
afterwards Calvin, began all upon a sudden to introduce
too great a Reformation, not only as to the inferiour
but also the Essential parts of the Church, and
thereby fell from one extreme to another: this proved a
main obstacle to the increase of the Protestant Religion. 
For Luther had hitherto made very little alteration
in outward Matters. He had left in the Churches
the Ornaments, Clocks, Organs, Candles, and such
like, he had retained the greatest part of the Mass,
but had added some Prayers in the Native Tongue
so that he was looked upon by most as a Reformer of
the Abuses only. But when it seemed that this Revolution
was likely to become Universal, Zwinglius appeared
in switzerland, as did Calvin afterwards in
France; these, instead of following the footsteps of Luther,
began to Preach against the Presence of the Body
of Christ in the sacrament of the Lord's supper, abolished
all sorts of Ceremonies and Ornaments, destroyed all
Reliques, broke the Altars and Images, abolished all
order of the Hierarchy, and despoiled Religion of all
such things as did most affect the Eyes and exteriour
senses of the People. This caused an aversion and
animosity in the Common People against them, and increased
its Zeal for that Religion, which it had received
from its Ancestors. The Riches of the Church did
partly promote Luther's Doctrine, a great many having
thereby taken an opportunity to possess themselves of
of these ample Revenues; nevertheless the same kept a
great many Prelates under the obedience of the Roman
Chair, who, if they had not been afraid of losing their
Rich Benefices, would not have been so backward to
side with Luther's Party. This was manifestly to be
seen in France, where both the Prelates and Common
People had made no great account of the Popes Authority
before the Reformation, but when they saw
that those of the Reformed Religion were for breaking
into their Quarters, they agreed better afterwards with

the Court of Rome, and the Commonalty was very
Zealous against the Reformed Religion. §. The Popish sovereignty recovered. 28. But besides this the Pope, as soon as his adherents
had recovered themselves from their first consternation,
and his Enemies were faln out among themselves,
has since settled his Affairs in such a manner, that the
Protestants in all likelyhood will not only not be able
to hurt him for the future, but he also by degrees gets
ground of them. For those things wherewith Luther
did upbraid them, and did the most mischief to them,
they have either quite abolished, or at least they are
transacted in a more decent manner; si non castè, tamen
cautè: They have also made use of the same Weapons,
wherewith Luther did attack them. For the
Popes now a days do not insult with so much haughtiness
over Princes, but treat them with more Civility
and Lenity. It is true, in the last Age Paul IV. behaved
himself very impudently towards spain, and in our
Age Paul V. did the same with Venice. But by the
mediation of wiser Heads, these Differences were
Composed, before they could draw after them any further
ill Consequences; and the Popes ever since have
been sufficiently convinced, that these hot-headed proceedings
are in no ways suitable to their present condition. 
For Paul V. did quickly give fair words, when
the French Ambassadour made him believe, that the
Venetians had sent for some Ministers from Geneva, to
be instructed in the Principles of the Reformed Religion. 
Neither have of late years sate such Debauchees
in the Papal Chair as Alexander VI. or such Martial
Popes as Julius II. was, but of late they have endeavoured
to carry on their Intreagues under hand,
whilst they in outward appearance pretend to be the
Promoters and Mediatours of Peace. That most
scandalous Trade of Indulgences, and that gross sort
of simony they have set aside, whilst they make it
their business to cajole the People out of their mony,
in a more handsome manner. The Bishops are now of another stamp,The Bishops, Priests, and Monks, more Regular and Learned than heretofore. and carry it
on with much more gravity than before the times of
Luther, nay, there are now among the Prelats eccellent

and well qualified Men. The Ordinary Priests and
Monks also have been much Reformed in their Manners,
and been obliged to lay aside their former brutish
Ignorance. Luther And his adherents did at first gain
mightily upon the People by their most excellent and
learned sermons, and by their Books which they published
thereby to excite the People to Piety, Prayers,
godly Meditations and Exercises. Both which the
Papists have imitated since, for among them now adays
are to be found most excellent Preachers, and very good
Prayer-Books; so that the Protestant Clergy has now
not much to object against them, as to their ability or
outward behaviour. They have also got a very good
insight into all the Controverted Points, and have a
dosen or more Distinctions at hand against any Objection. 
For example: whereas nothing seems more ridiculous,
than that the Pope should grant his Indulgences
for twenty or thirty thousands years to come, they
know how to give this a fine colour by these Distinctions
of Intensive and Extensive, Potentialiter and
Actualiter, which relish strangely with young students,
and the ignorant suppose them to be terms full of Mysteries. 
And because the Ignorance of the Clergy, and
the hatred conceived against Learning and learned Men,
had proved very prejudicial to the Popish Monarchy,
the Popish Clergy, and especially the Jesuits, have since
altered their Course, and having taken upon them the
Education of Youth, have pretended to the Monopoly
of Learning among the Roman Catholicks; so that
since that time Learning has not only not been prejudicial
but very profitable to them. Lastly,How they make Converts. they now adays do not make use of Fire and
sword to propagate the Roman Catholick Religion, but
the chief Men among the Protestants are inticed to
come over to their Party with fair Words, great Promises,
and actual Recompenses. If any one who is
well qualified will go over to their Party he may be
sure to make his Fortune, since the Wealth of their
Church furnishes them with sufficient Means to maintain
such a Person, tho his Merits were not extraordinary. 
Whereas on the contrary, if any one goes over
from them to the Protestants Religion, and either has

not wherewithal to live, or else is endowed with extraordinary
qualifications, he must expect nothing but
want. The House of Austria most Zealous for Popery. Last of all, those of the House of Austria have
greatly promoted the Popish Interest, when they drove
the Protestants out of the Hereditary Countries in Germany,
out of the Kingdom of Bohemia and the Countries
belonging thereunto, and lately have done the
same to the Protestants in Hungary, except to a very
few; or else have forced them to profess themselves Roman
Catholicks. §. The Temporal state of the Pope. 29. From what has been said it may easily be understood,
in what manner this Ecclesiastical sovereignty
has extended her Power over the Western parts of
Christendom. But throughly to understand the whole
structure, and Composure of this Engine, and by what
means it is sustained, it will not be improper to consider
the Pope in two different ways; first as a Prince in
Italy, and secondly as the spiritual Monarch over the
Western Church. As to the first it is to be observed,
that the Pope may be reckoned a Potent Prince in Italy,
but is in no ways to be Compared with the other
Princes in Europe. 
         His Dominions. The Countries under his Jurisdiction
are the City of Rome, with her Territories situated on
both sides of the River Tyber; the Dukedom of Benevento
in the Kingdom of Naples, the Dukedoms of
spoleto, Ʋrbino and Ferrara, the Marquisate of Ancona,
several places in Tuscany, Romaniola or Flaminia, where
are situated Bologna and Ravenna. In France the Country
of Avignon belongs to him. Parma is a Fief of the
Church, which Paul III. granted to his son Lewis Farnese. 
But since that time a Constitution has been made,
that it shall not be in the power of any Pope to Alienate
any Fief, or to grant any of the Countries belonging
to the Church in Fief to any person whatsoever,
to prevent the ruin of the Ecclesiastick state, and,
that, in case the Revenues from abroad should fail, the
Pope nevertheless might not want means to maintain
himself and his Court. The Kingdom of Naples is also
a Fief of the Church, in acknowledgment of which the
King of spain every year presents the Pope with a white
Horse, and some thousands of Ducats. What other

Pretensions the Court of Rome makes are out of date. 
For the rest, these Countries are indifferently Populous
and Fertile, having several Cities of Note, out of which
the Pope receives a Revenue of two Millions per annum. 
And the Popes Ministers take effectual care, that their
subjects may not be overgrown in riches. Perhaps there might be a considerable number of
good soldiers maintained out of the Ecclesiastick Estate,His Forces. 
but his Military strength is scarce worth taking notice
of, since he makes use of quite other means to preserve
his state than other Princes do. He maintains about
twenty Gallies, which have their station at Civita Vecchia. 
The chief state maxim of the Pope, as a Temporal
Prince is, that Peace may be preserved in Italy,
and that Italy may remain in the same state, as it is now,
and especially, that there may not be introduced any
other sovereign Power, which might prove so formidable
as to domineer over the rest. He must take great care
that the Turks may not get footing in Italy, and in case
of an Invasion from the Turks, not only Italy would
be obliged to join against them, but also whole
Christendom must be called in to help to chase out
these Barbarians, since no Christian Prince would be
contented that this delicious Country should fall into
their hands. The Pope has nothing to fear more from the German
Empire,How he stands with relation to Germany, spain and France. 
          as long as it remains upon the same Foundation. 
But if it should fall under the Government of an
Absolute Monarch, it is likely he might attempt to renew
the Antient Pretensions. spain and France are the
two Kingdoms, which are most formidable to the Pope. 
Against them the Pope makes use of this Maxim, that
he either sets them together by the Ears, or at least keeps
up the Ballance betwixt them, that one may not become
quite Master of the other. I am apt to believe
that the Pope would be glad with all his heart, that
the spaniards were driven out of Italy, especially out
of the Kingdom of Naples. But it is scarce to be supposed,
that he should be able to do it by his own
strength, and to make use of the French in this case,
would be to fall out of the Frying-Pan into the Fire. 
Therefore all what the Pope can do, is, to take care,

that spain may not encroach upon others in Italy; and
there is no question but if the spaniards should attempt
any such thing, France and all the other Italian states
would be ready to oppose their design. Neither can it
be pleasing to the Pope, if the King of France should get
so much footing in Italy, as to be able to sway Matters
there according to his pleasure, which the Pope ought to
prevent with all his might. The Pope need not fear
much from the other states of Italy. For tho' some of
them are under hand his Enemies, and dread his spiritual
Power, some of them also have been chastised by
the Court of Rome, nevertheless, they must at least in
outward appearance pay to the Pope a due Veneration,
neither dare they as much as devise to make any Conquests
upon the Pope. Notwithstanding this, they would
not look with a good Eye upon the Pope, if he should pretend
to make any Conquests upon his Neighbours and
enlarge his Dominions; this refined Nation being extreamly
jealous, and desirous to keep up the ballance betwixt
the states of Italy. 
        § 30. Particular Constitution of the Popish Monarchy as spiritual. But if we consider the Pope, secondly, as the
spiritual Monarch of Christendom and the Vicar of
Jesus Christ upon Earth, we meet in this spiritual state
with such surprising and subtile pieces, that it must be
confessed, that since the beginning of the World, there
has not been set up a more artificial Fabrick than the
Popish Monarchy. It has required the more sagacity to
erect and sustain this structure, the more the ends of
this sovereignty are quite different from the ends of all
other states in the World, and the more feeble the Title
appears upon which it is founded. For it is the main
end of other Commonwealths, to live in security and
Peace; for the maintaining of which, the subjects contribute
a share out of their Goods and Possessions; nay,
venture their lives that they may sufficiently provide
against the attempts of malicious People, and live in security
and without danger from their Enemies. And besides
this, it is the Duty of every subject to take care
that he may be able to maintain himself out of his own
Revenues, or by his Labour and Industry. But the Popish
Monarch's chief design is, that the Popes and the

Clergy may live in Plenty and splendour in this World,
all which is to be maintained at the Cost and Charge
of other People, who must be perswaded to part
with their Money by several shining Arguments and artificial
Persuasions. And whereas other states are fain
to maintain their Forces and Garrisons with great Expences,
the Pope on the contrary entertains his Militia
without any Charge, but rather with Profit to himself. 
And whereas it is also a state Maxim among the wiser
Princes, not to extend their Conquests too far, the Pope
has no occasion to imitate them in this point, since it is
neither dangerous nor troublesome to him, tho' he extends
his Jurisdiction over the East and West Indies. 
The Rights of sovereignty are founded upon evident
and undeniable Principles and divine Institution, since
without it, it is impossible that mankind should live honestly,
securely, commodiously and decently. But to
find out the same necessity and foundation of the Pope's
sovereign Authority, and to demonstrate that as the
Peace and Welfare of Mankind, cannot subsist without
a supreme Civil Power; so the Christian World cannot
be without a supreme Ecclesiastical Power, is in my
mind impossible to be done. He that is unwilling to believe
this, let him find out a demonstrative proof and
he will be the miracle of the World. But if the Pope's
Champions pretend to a positive Command from God
Almighty, they are obliged to prove by clear and evident
proofs, and that in all its clauses and determinations
out of the Holy scripture; that our saviour when
he sent his Disciples all over the World to preach the
Christian Faith, did give them full Power, not only to
propagate the Christian Doctrine among all Nations,
and not to be dependent on any humane Power in their
Office, so as thereby to be hindered from preaching
or forced to add or retrench any thing from their Doctrine
(which Power is unquestionable:) But also that
they had a Power granted them, to put into the Ministry
of the Gospel, and that without the Consent of the
Magistrates (tho' the same professed the true Christian
Religion) as many and whom they pleased; that they
also might grant to these again full Power to increase
their Order to such a number as they should think fit

themselves, without having any regard to the Civil
Power or Magistrates, whose Right and Title is thereby
empaired. And because they cannot live upon the
Air, they must also have a Power granted them to seek
out all ways and means not only for their subsistance,
but also for carrying on their pride and extravagancies. 
They must also have a prerogative granted them of being
exempted from the Civil Jurisdiction both in their
persons and such possessions as they have acquired to
themselves, tho' the same appertain to the Revenues of
the Commonwealth, are situated in the Territories, and
enjoy the protection of the sovereign, who is to have no
power to lay Taxes upon them, to prescribe them limits
or imploy them to any other uses. They must
also prove that the supreme Direction over this Order as
well concerning their Office as their Possessions does belong
to one of the same Order on whom the rest depend
as their sovereign, and that the Civil Magistrates cannot
pretend to any superiour Jurisdiction over them, tho'
the Ecclesiastical Order either by its number or misbehaviour
should prove pernicious to the state, and tho'
the state could not be maintained without the Revenues
of the Ecclesiasticks, which must not be imployed
for the benefit of the publick without the Consent of
him who has the supreme Direction over this Order. 
Besides this, they are obliged also to prove some other
Hypotheses of theirs, which are Matter of Fact. As for
example, that our saviour Christ did grant the spiritual
sovereignty over the Church to st. Peter only, without
allowing the least share to the rest of the Apostles. 
That he did grant this Prerogative, not only to st. Peter
for his own person, but also that the same should be a
perpetual Inheritance to such as should succeed him in
that place where he resided as Bishop. Besides this, they
must prove that st. Peter was actually Bishop of Rome,
that he exercised the same Power there, and granted the
said Prerogative to no other place where he used to
preach besides Rome. And because these Points are so
very hard to be proved, the Popish Doctors are obliged
to be very cautious in proposing these Questions distinctly
to the World, but rather treat of the same confusedly
and superficialy. It is rather their business to fill

the Peoples Heads with far-fetched Arguments which do
not so nearly touch the point, viz. concerning the great
Promises, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against
the Church, concerning the great Authority and Prosperity
of the Church, her Antiquity, the succession of the
Popes, the Holy Fathers and Councils, the Authority of
so many Ages and Nations, Miracles and such like stuff,
fit for a Declamation. They also make use of another
expedient, viz. that if any one dares to contradict these
things, he is immediately without hearing his reasons,
branded with the Name of a Heretick, and esteemed
as one that being a novice and ignorant in his Trade,
ought not to be so bold as to contradict his Master, but
deserves to be burnt. § 31. Why the Popish sovereignty was to be exercised in the Form of a Monarchy. It is easily to be imagined, that this spiritual sovereignty
was of necessity to be established in the form
of a Monarchy, since it was in no ways suitable to a
Democratical or Aristocratical Government, not only by
reason of several inconveniencies which would have attended
it, but more especially, because that so many different
Heads as sway a Democratical and Aristocratical
Government, would even by the most severe Laws never
have been kept in such a Union, but that by raising
of Factions and Dissensions they would have easily
overturned a Work which was built upon so slight a
Foundation. But among the several sorts of Monarchical
Governments, they have chosen such a one as that
by all the Art of Men, there could not have been invented
one more suitable to their purpose; it being most
certain that all the speculative Inventions of the most
refined Politicians, are not in the least to be compared to
what may be met wital in this Popish Monarchy. 'Tis
true, some Princes have gained to themselves and their
Government a great Authority, by pretending to be the
Off-spring of the Gods, and that they had laid the Foundation
of their Government by the express Command
of the Gods and by their peculiar Approbation; wherefore
they used to be after their death placed in the number
of the Gods, and were adored as such. But the
Pope has gone farther, and perswaded the People that
he is the Lieutenant of Jesus Christ, who has all Power

in Heaven and Earth, and his Vicar in the World, and
that in a more exalted sense than it is spoken of the
Magistrates, that they are Ministers of God's Justice upon
Earth. For he pretends that he has the Power of
dispensing the Merits of Jesus Christ, and that such as
refuse to acknowledge this Prerogative, are not capable
of obtaining salvation. And since there is nothing more
powerful in this World to induce People to a profound
Veneration than the Divine Majesty, and no motive
more strong to enforce from them an obedience and an
entire submission to all sorts of hardship than the fear
of God's wrath and eternal damnation; it is evident that
if this Point is once gained and the People thoroughly
perswaded, there needs no further proof of the rest of
their Articles of Faith, than that 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, the Pope has
determined it so. Besides this,Way it must be an elective Monarchy. most Nations having esteemed an hereditary
Government the most convenient and least dangerous,
have introduced that form into their states; but
this form of Government could not suite with the intention
of this spiritual Monarchy. For in these states
where the Crown is hereditary, it must of necessity sometimes
happen, that the same is devolved to Princes who
are Minors; and it would be an odd sight, that a
Child that rides the Hobby-horse, should be taken for
the Vicar of Christ, and that the Protectour of Christendom
shoul want a Tutor. Neither is it to be supposed
that young Princes could behave themselves so
gravely and wisely, as seems to be requisite for a Person
of his station; neither can it as much as be hoped, that
a whole succession of Princes should be inclinable to such
a Function. In a word, an hereditary succession would
have made it the same with a temporal state, which
could never have been maintained long upon so awkward
and slight a Foundation. For the great Ministers
themselves would have been for putting by the
Pope, that they might succeed in his stead; whereas
these seeing they cannot possess themselves of the Papacy
by open force are now very obedient, in hopes that
either they themselves or at least their Friends may one
time or another attain to this Dignity by Election. 
Besides this, it might easily have happened, that in case

the Royal Family should have been extinguished, such
Dissensions might have arisen concerning the succession,
that the whole Frame of the state would thereby have
been disjointed. It was also thought convenient this spiritual sovereign
should be obliged never to marry,Why the Pope was to live in a state of Celibacy. which seemed
most suitable to the gravity of this Court, since a great
train of Ladies living in great splendour and plenty
would have made such a figure, as must needs appear
but little suitable to excite others to a Holy Life and
Devotion. Wherefore it was the main design, by a
fained hypocrisy to impose a belief upon the People, as
if the Court of Rome was so wholly taken up with spiritual
Affairs, that there was no room left for worldly
Pleasures. It was also reasonably supposed, that a Prince
who had Wife and Children might sometimes be led
away to take more to heart the private Interest of his
Family than the publick Good of the state, since there
can scarce be any thing more prevailing upon a Man,
than the consideration of the welfare, and preservation
of Wife and Children. And what Alexander VI. and
Paul III. did with their Bastards, have been convincing
Instances of this position to the Court of Rome. It is possible
that they also rook this into consideration, that if a
Temporal foreign Prince should obtain this Dignity, he
would entail it upon his House, which inconveniencies
are now avoided by the Obligation which is laid upon
the Pope never to marry. The Conclave is also a most admirable Invention to
bridle the immoderate Ambition,The Conclave. and prevent those
schisms, which used formerly miserably to afflict the
see and weaken the Authority of the Popes; besides
that, thereby a long Vacancy of the Chair is prevented,
and by means of this Election, it is much easier to pick
out one that is fitly qualified to represent the great and
artificial Hypocrite, and afterwards to make the People
believe, that are ignorant of the Intrigues of the Conclave,
that it was by the particular providence of God
Almighty, that such a Person was chosen as was the
most worthy to be God's Vicar upon Earth. Thus
much at least may be obtained by an Election, that such
a Person is chosen as is well versed in the Arts of Policy

and their ambitious Designs, and whose Age being
above the folly and extravagancies of young Men, may
by his years and long experience appear more venerable
in his Function. What Qualifications are necessary for one that is to be chosen Pope. It is also a very wise Ordinance
concerning the Election of a Pope, that he is to have
two third parts of the Votes in the Conclave, which
seems to have been introduced, that the new Pope might
not be displeasing to a great number of Cardinals. Now
a days it is a general maxim in the choice of a Pope,
to elect an Italian, which is not only done because they
rather will bestow this Dignity and Advantage upon a
Native of Italy than upon a Foreigner, but also because
the security and preservation of the Papal Chair depends
in a great measure on the ballance which is to be kept
betwixt France and spain, which is not to be expected
from a French of spanish Pope, who would quickly turn
the scale, and by granting too great Prerogatives to his
Country-men, endeavour to exclude others from the
Papal Chair. They also choose commonly a Pope who
is pretty well in years, but very seldom a young one,
that also others may be in hopes of attaining the same
Dignity, and that a young Pope during a long Regency
may not undertake to alter their Customs
and Maxims, or to make his Family so Rich and
Potent and set up so many Creatures of his own, as
thereby to entail the Papal Chair upon his House. Besides
that, in this station where the Pope need not to
go into the Field, there is more occasion for a grave
antient Man than a vigorous young Person. It is also
another Maxim among them, to take care that he may
not be too near a Kin to the deceased Pope, that the
vacant Church-Benefices may not fall into the Hands
of one Family, and the new Pope may be the sooner
prevailed upon to amend the Faults of his Predecessor. 
Lastly, They are commonly for choosing such a one as is
neither too much addicted to the spanish nor the French
Interest, yet that he be not hated by either of these
two parties. Wherefore it is a Custom among them,
that both these Crowns give in a List of such Cardinals
as they would have excluded from being elected
Pope. Notwithstanding all this it often so happens,
that one is chosen Pope of whom no body thought before,

when the Cardinals are tired out by so many Intrigues,
and are glad to get out of the Conclave. It is also
often observed, that a Pope proves quite another Man
after he is come to sit in the Chair than he was before,
when yet a Cardinal. The Pope at his entring upon the
Government, is not tied to any certain Rules or Capitulations,
since it would seem very unbecoming to controul by
humane Laws and Contracts the Power of him who is
pretended to be endowed with the Holy Ghost. But the College of the Cardinals is as it were the standing
Council of the Ecclesiastical state,College of the Cardinals. in like manner as
the Chapters of the Cathedrals are to the Bishops in Germany. 
With those the Pope advises concerning Matters
of the greatest moment; nevertheless it often happens
that the Popes and their Nephews make but little account
of their Advice, but act as they please. The
chief Prerogative of the Cardinals consists chiefly in that
they have the Power of choosing a Pope, and that out
of their own Body, they being supposed to be the next
to him, and best acquainted with the Affairs of the
Court of Rome, which is one necessary qualification of a
Pope. Their ordinary number is Threescore and Ten,
which is seldom complete. They now a-days are treated
by the Title of your Eminency, according to a Decree of
Pope Ʋrban VIII. whereas they were formerly called Most
Illustrious (Illustrissimi) which Title was grown very common
in Italy. And because the Cardinals had got a new
Title, the Princes of Italy pretended also to be treated by
the Title of your Highness (Altazza) whereas formerly
they were very well satisfied with the Title of your Excellency
(Excellenza. ) The Election of the Cardinals
depends absolutely on the Pope's pleasure, who nevertheless,
constantly takes notice of such as are recommended
to that Dignity by France, spain and other Princes. 
The Parasites of the Court of Rome, are not ashamed to
maintain, that the Cardinal's Cap is equal in Dignity
to a Crowned Head, and to this day they pretend to
have the precedency before the Electors of the Empire. Ever since the time of Pope sixtus IV. The Popes enrich th•ir Kindred. 
         viz. since the
Year 1471. the Popes have made it their Business to enrich
their Families out of the Church Revenues, of
which there are very remarkable Instances. For it is

related that sixtus V. during his Regency of five Years,
did bestow upon his Family above three Millions of
Ducats; and Gregory XV. had in two Years and three
Months, got together the value of three Millions in
Lands, without reckoning what he left in ready
Money. It is reported of the House of the Barbarini's,
that at the death of Ʋrban VIII. they were possessed
of 227 Offices and Church-Benefices, most of them
reckoned at three, five, eight and ten Thousand seudi a
piece, whereby it is said, they got together a Treasure
of 30 Millions of scudi. This has been represented
as a very scandalous thing by some, but if duly
considered, it is a great folly to suppose, that since the
main intention of the Popish sovereignty is to enrich the
Clergy, the Popes should stifle their natural inclination
toward their Kindred, and not make Hay whilst the
sun shines. This is rather to be looked upon as a common
Infirmity, that Favourites and others whilst they
are Fortunate are envied by others, who are vexed because
Fortune is not so favourable to them. Besides
that, the Revenues of the Church are so great, that the
Popes since they need not entertain any considerable
Army, scarce know how to employ them better. since the time of Pope Ʋrban VIII. a Custom has
been introduced, to make one of the Pope's Nephews
Chief Minister of the Ecclesiastical state, whom they
call Cardinal Patroon (Cardinal Patrono. ) Among other
Reasons,Cardinal Patroon. why the Pope commits the management
of Affairs to one of his Nephews, this is alledged for
one; that by reason of the nearness of Blood, he ought
to be preferred before others, and that by so doing,
the Pope's Person is better secured against any attempts
which are sooner made upon his Life than of other hereditary
Princes, whose death their successours are able
to revenge. How fearful the Popes are of Poyson, may
be judged from thence, that as often as the Pope receives
the sacrament, his Chaplain who is to administer the
Bread and Wine, is obliged to taste of both before the
the Pope. It is also pretended, that by the Ministry of
the Nephews, this Advantage is obtained, that the other
Ministers and Governours have not so much opportunity
to enrich themselves, and to put one another

out of place, which is the common Custom in Elective
states. For their Nephews are few in number, and
therefore sooner to be satisfied; neither will they easily
suffer that others should enrich themselves, since they are
sensible that all the hatred falls upon themselves. They
are also very serviceable to the Pope, in that they more
freely can disclose the Interests of the several Princes to
him, than other Ministers who are not so nearly allied to
him, and that they are fain to be more circumspect
in their management of Affairs, for fear, left they may
one time or another be called to an account; for which
reason it is their Business, so to oblige one Prince or another,
that they may upon all occasions be sure of his
Protection. Besides, that by their Assistance, Affairs
may be carried on with much more secrecy than otherwise. 
And if the Pope were destitute of their Counsel,
he would be obliged to have recourse to the Cardinals,
who most commonly are very partial, being most of
them engaged to foreign Princes either by Pensions or
Benefices. § 32. Concerning the Celibacy of the Popish Clergy. The subjects of this Ecclesiastical Monarchy
may commodiously be divided into two several sorts; the
first comprehends the whole Clergy, the second all the
rest of Christendom, as far as the same professes the Roman
Catholick Religion, which is commonly called
the Laiety. The first may be compared to the standing
Army of a Prince, who thereby manitains his Conquests;
the rest are to be deemed as subjects that are
Tributaries to the Prince, and are obliged to maintain
those standing Forces at their Charge. The first have
this particular Obligation upon them, that they must
abstain from Marriage. This is done under pretence
of a special Holiness, and that thereby they may be the
more fit to perform their Duty without any hinderance;
but the true reason is, that they should not prefer the
Interest and Welfare of their Wife and Children, before
that of the Church, and in consideration thereof, not
side with those Princes under whose Jurisdiction they
live, or that they should not enrich their Children with
the Revenues of the Church, but be the more ready upon
all occasions to execu•e the Pope's Will, especially

against such Princes, under whose Protection they live. 
For since Wife and Children are esteemed the dearest
Pledges, not to be left to the discretion of an enraged
Enemy, they could the easier despise the anger of their
Princes, if they had no other Care to take but for themselves,
a single Man not needing to fear a livelihood in
any place whatever. And it has been the main endeavours
of the Popes to exempt the Clergy by all means
from the Jurisdiction of the Civil Magistrates, and to
make them only dependent on himself. Besides this,
the avaricious Clergy would not have made so good a
Harvest if it had been taken for granted among the
People, that the same was collected for their Wife and
Children, whereas now it is pretended, that they receive
not for themselves, but for the maintainance of the
Church. But those who have been so busie to force
Celibacy upon the Clergy, were forgetful in not prescribing
them at the same time a Recipe against Incontinency,
and which they seem to stand in great need of. 
How vast a number there is of this sort of People,Their Number. may
be best judged out of what is related of Pope Paul IV. 
who used to brag, that he had 228000 Parishes, and
44000 Monasteries under his Jurisdiction, if he did not
mistake in his account, especially as to the Monasteries,
The Clergy may again be subdivided into two sorts, viz. 
those who are bare Priests and Ecclesiasticks, and those
who have engaged themselves by a particular Vow, viz. 
the Monks and Jesuits who are to be esteemed the Pope's
pretorian Bands. They receive for their pay Honours
and Dignities, great Revenues, a quiet Life, without
any great Labour, and live always near a good Kitchin;
but those who have addicted themselves to a
more strict Order, are fed with the vain belief of Holiness,
great Merits and particular Prerogatives above others. § 33. The Popish Doctrine suted to the s••e. The Pope makes use of this Artifice to keep the
Laiety in Obedience, that he persuades them to receive
and consider his Ecclesiastical Troops, as the Chief
Promoters of their salvation, and Masters over their
Consciences; which serves like a Bridle to lead and
turn them about according to the Will of the Clergy. 

And that every thing may be accommodated to the Interest
of this spiritual Monarchy, several Articles of the
Christian Religion have been by degrees stretched or
patched up with new Additions; and any one that will
duly weigh these Matters wherein they differ with their
Adversaries, will soon find that in those points there is generally
a mixture of Interest as to the Authority, Power
and Revenues of the Clergy. Among those in the first
place is to be reckoned the Doctrine concerning the
Authority and Power of the Pope, whereby they pretend
to set him above Councils, and make him Infallible;
which point is stretched to the utmost by the
Jesuits, because, if that stands fast, all the rest is soon
proved. As that of the Pop••s Power. Wherefore, what has been taught formerly,
and if I am not mistaken, is taught even to this Day, by
the Doctors of the sorbon, viz. that the Councils are
equal to, or rather above the Pope, is destructive to the
very fundamental Constitution of the Popish Monarchy,
since this Doctrine smells strongly of a Democracy,
which is directly contrary to a Monarchy. And it is not
easily to be reconciled how the Pope who pretends to
have such great Prerogatives above all others, should be
subject to the Censure of his Cretures and Vassals. 
For as they will have it, whatsoever either the Holy
scripture, or the antient Fathers have attributed to the
Church, ought altogether to be applied to the Pope, in
like manner, as what is spoken of a whole Kingdom, is
commonly to be understood of the King. The Laiety has been debarred from reading the Holy
scripture,The prohibition of the Laietya reading the scripturea. by which means not only the Authority of
the Clergy is maintained among the People, as if the
Priests were the only Men that have a privilege to approach
to the Divine Oracles; but also the Laiety is
thereby prevented from finding out those points in the
scripture which are repugnant to the Interest of the
Clergy: For if the People should once get a true Understanding
of the scripture, they would not be so forward
to follow so blindly the Instructions of the Priests. 
They also by this means prevent the Laiety from diving
too deeply into Divinity, which they pretend belongs
only to the Clergy; and for this reason it is that they
attribute the Power of explaining the scripture to the

Pope only, that nothing may be brought to light, which
may in any ways be prejudicial to the spiritual Monarchy. 
For the same reason the Pope pretends to
have the sole Authority of deciding all Controversies
whatsoever. It is also given out among the People,Traditions. that the Holy
scripture is imperfect, which must be explained by antient
Traditions; whereby they gain this point▪ that if
they invent any Doctrine for the Interest of the spiritual
state, whereof there is not the least footsteps to be
found in the Holy scripture, they without any other
proof, may only have recourse to the antient Traditions. The distinction betwixt Venial and Mortal sins,Venial and Mortal sins. as
also what is alledged de casibus reservatis, is barely invented
for the benefit of the Clergy. That infinite number
of Books of Confession, enough to fraight whole
Fleets withal, is not published with an intention to correct
Vices, but that by laying a Tax upon the same,
the Clergy may the better be able to maintain their
Grandeur, and satisfie their Avarice. The most comfortable
Doctrine of remission of sins, has wholly been
accommodated to the Interest of the Clergy. Penance▪
          For, because
it would not have turned to the profit of the
Clergy, if every one who truly repented should obtain remission
of his sins, only by Faith in the Merits of Christ;
it has been the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, that
it was an essential piece of penitence, and the means to
obtain forgiveness of sins, if a most exact and precise
account of every individual sin committed was given
to the Priest. By which means, they not only keep the
People under their Devotion, and make such impressions
upon them as are fitting for their purpose; but
they also come thereby to the knowledge of all secrets,
Counsels, Designs and Inclinations of the People, which
they make good use of for their benefit; notwithstanding,
that they are under an obligation not to reveal
any thing that is told them by way of Confession;
for, else it would be impossible for them to persuade
the People to act against the natural Inclination of all
Mankind. The Priest has also a Power to command
works of satisfaction to be done, whereby he commonly

has his good share. For tho' certain Prayers, Pilgrimages,
Fasts, Flagellations and the like, are often imposed
upon them for Penances, yet they also very often
condemn some, and especially the richer sort in a good
sum of Money, to be given instead of a Penance to a
certain Monastery, Church or the Poor, among whom
are the Mendicant-Fryars. These honest Fellows call
themselves minimos fratrum, according to the 25. Chap. 
of st. Matthew, that they may have a fair shining pretence
to fill their Purses. For by this Interpretation, the
Christains have got this benefit, that they are obliged
to feed and maintain 100000 lazy, idle Fellows. Besides
this, the first sort of Penance may be redeemed
with Money, if you think it too hard to be performed. 
And who that is wealthy, would not be civil and liberal
towards his Father-Confessour, to oblige him to a
mitigation of the Penance or because he has already
shewed himself favourable before?Why good Works have been made meritorious and
the means of obtaining salvation from God Almighty,Merit of good Works. is
easily to be guessed. For when they were to give a definition
of good Works, they were sure to put in the
first place, that the Pople ought to be liberal towards
the Clergy, Churches and Monasteries, and to perform
every thing which is commanded them by the Pope and
his adherents, tho' never so full of superstition and Hypocrisy. 
Neither must this be forgot, that they also
have taught, that the Monks are not only able to perform
good Works sufficient for themselves, but that also
they have an overplus of Merits which they can fell to
the Laiety. And out of this overplus, they have laid
up an inexhaustible store very profitable to the Clergy,
which costs them nothing, which does not grow musty
nor ever decays, and which cannot be returned upon
their hands, when the Buyer finds out the Cheat. Their Religious Exercises are so full of Ceremonies,Ceremonies,
so many superfluous Feasts and Processions are instituted
so many Chapels are Altars erected only to employ so
great a number of Clergymen, who else would appear
like so many idle Fellows, whereas now it turns all to
their profit; which is also the reason why they have encreased
the number of sacraments of seven, since they

know that none of them can be administred, but the
Priest gets by it. The Mass without Communicants
has been introduced and proclaimed a sacrifice both for
the dead and the living, that they might have an opportunity
to put both the dead and the living under Contribution. 
For no body undertakes any thing of moment,
but he has a Mass sung first, for the good success
of the thing in hand. No body of wealth dyes, but he
orders a good store of Masses to be sung for his soul, all
which brings grist to the Priest's Mill. On the other hand,Half Communion. after it once was become an abuse,
that the Laiety did receive the sacrament without
partaking of the Cup, it was made into a Law. 
And tho' the contrary was very evident both by the Institution
of Christ, and the practice of the Church for
a great many Centuries, yet did they persist with great
obstinacy, because it should not seem that the Clergy had
committed an Errour; and also that they might have a
Prerogative before the Laiety in this sacrament. And
to ridicule the more impudently both God and Men,
they give to the Laiety a Chalice which is not consecrated,
which in very despicable Terms they call the rinsing
Chalices, as People when they have eaten any uncleanly
thing, use to rinse their Mouths. Marriage also was to be made a sacrament,Marriage made a sacrament. tho' nothing
is more absurd, that the Clergy might have an
opportunity to draw all matrimonial Causes under their
Jurisdiction, which are often very profitable, very various
and of the greatest Consequence, since the welfare,
inheritance and succession of most People, nay,
even of whole Kingdoms depend thereon. This obliged
Mary Queen of England to endeavour the re-establishment
of Popery in that Kingdom; for without the
Pope's Authority, she must have passed for a Bastard. 
And Philip III. King of spain was among other reasons
obliged to the Pope, because he had given Dispensation
to his Father to marry his own sister's Daughter, of
whom Philip was born, which Marriage would not
easily have been approved by other Christians. There
were also so many prohibited degrees introduced on
purpose that the Clergy might have frequent opportunities
to give Dispensations, whereby they know how

to feather their Nest. Extreme Unction. By the Extreme Ointment the
Priest takes an occasion to exhort the dying people to
leave Legacies for pious uses, which they commonly
know how to apply to the advantage of their own
Order. Purgatory. Purgatory was invented for no other purpose,
but that the dying Man, who at that time is not so
greedy of worldly Goods, which he is to leave to others,
might be liberal towards the Clergymen, in hopes,
by their intercession and a good number of Masses to
get the sooner out of this hot place. The Veneration
paid to the Reliques,Reliques▪ Prayers to saints. has also been very beneficial to
the Clergy; these are employed, besides other uses, to
reward people of Quality, that have done great services to
the Pope, with a piece of an old Bone in lieu of a better
present. The Adoration of the saints serves for a pretext
to build the more Churches, institute more Feasts
and employ and feed a greater number of Priests. The
power, which the Pope has assumed of Canonization,
gives him a considerable authority among the People, as
if it were his prerogative to bestow Dignities and Offices
upon whom he thinks fit, even in Heaven, and that
God Almighty cannot but accept of such Referendaries,
as the Pope is pleased to represent to him. By this
means he makes himself Master of the Inclinations of
the People though living in far distant places, unto
whom he proposes this as a Recompense of their
Credulity and Ambition, if they stick at nothing
to promote his Interest. And ever since this superstition
has taken root in Christendom, those who
have been Canonized have for the most part been
Clergymen, who either by a new invented Hypocrisie,
or outward appearance of Holiness had made
themselves famous in the World. Or if by chance one
Layman or another has attained to this Dignity, either
he himself, or at least those that interceeded for him,
have been fain to deserve very well of the Papal Chair. 
Not to mention here, in what manner they by fictitious
Miracles, several sorts of Images, Apparitions, Exorcisms,
Indulgences, Jubilees, prohibition of divers
sorts of Victuals, and such like tricks used to fool the
People out of their mony. 
§. The Universities have promoted the Popish sovereignty. 34. Next to what has been said, the Universities,
which have partly been Instituted by the Popes Authority,
partly by other states, yet so that most of them
have been Confirmed by the Popes, who also have
claimed the supreme Direction over the some, have
been mainly instrumental in maintaining the Popish sovereignty. 
It is evident enough of what Consequence
this Direction must needs be to the Pope. For, since
in the Universities Men are first imbued with such
Opinions, as they afterwards are to make use of
during their whole Life, and instil them into others,
the Universities, and sciences there to be taught
were to be sure to be accommodated to the Popes
Interest. Neither were the Professours of Divinity
here, who claimed the Precedency before all others,
the only Creatures of the Pope, but also the Professours
of the Canon Law, who were as busie as any to put
his Decrees upon the World, and to maintain his Authority. 
For the World may thank the Canon-Law
for the first Introduction of those long Law suits, which
the Clergy pretended to belong to their Jurisdiction, that
by receiving of Bribes they might the sooner satisfie
their Avarice. The greatest-part of the Philosophers
were also the Popes slaves, and if one or another attempted
to investigate the true causes of Things, he
was sure to be kept under by all the rest. The Divinity
and Philosophy which was professed in these Universities
were not taught with an intention to make
the young students more learned and understanding,
but that the ingenious by these confused and idle terms
might be diverted from throughly investigating those
matters which would have led them to the whole discovery
of the Popish Intreagues. For their scholastick
Divinity is not employed in searching and explaining
the Holy scripture, but for the most part entangled in
useless questions, invented chiefly by Peter Lombard,
Thomas Aquinas, scotus, and the other Patriarchs of
Pedantry. And what they call Philosophy is nothing
else but a Collection of foolish Chimer's, empty Terms,
and very bad Latin, the knowledge of which is rather
hurtful than profitable, if you have not been better Instructed

otherwise. so that all what they pretended
to, was to take care that the sciences might not be
fundamentally taught to the students. With these
Trumperies the Universities were not only over-run
during the former barbarous times, but even continue
to this very day; and tho most sciences are so much
improved, the old Leaven is with great Industry preserved
and propagated: on the contrary all the solid
science, especially such, as are Instrumental in discovering
the Vulgar Errors of the World are suppressed. 
Above all the rest, the most useful of all, Doctrine
of Morality is much misinterpreted and entangled in
an endless Labyrinth, that the Fathers Confessours may
not want means to domineer over the Laymens Consciences,
and to entangle them with so many dubious and
double meaning insinuations, that they are thereby rendred
incapable to examin and rule their Actions, according
to solid Principles, but are obliged to be
guided blindfold according to the pleasure of their
Fathers Confessours. §. Why the Jesuits have taken upon them the Education of the Youth. 35. But, because Learning had given the main
blow to the Pope, at the time of Luther's Reformation,
the Jesuits, who may well be called the Popes Guard
du Corps, have afterwards taken upon them the management
of the Youth; for they not only teach publickly
in the Universities, but they have also engrossed to themselves
the Instruction of the Youth in the schools, that
they might have all the opportunity so to guide and direct
them in their studies, that they might not only not
prove prejudicial, but rather advantageous to the Kingdom
of Darkness. For by this way of managing the
Youth they have not only acquired vast Riches and Authority
to their Order, but also have been very instrumental
in maintaing the Popish Monarchy, which they
are bound to do by a particlar Vow above all the other
Monks. They make it their business to imprint into the
tender minds of the Youth a Veneration for the Pope,
and so to guide their inclinations as they think it
most profitable to the state of the Church. They use
the young people from their infancy to persist obstinately
in their conceived Opinions, and that no Reasons

ought to prevail against them, whereby they render them
incapable of ever attaining the knowledge of Truth. 
They have also an opportunity throughly to investigate
and discover the Capacities and Inclinations of their
Disciples, which they make good use of to their advantage,
whenever these are imployed in state Affairs. 
But such as they find of an extraordinary Capacity or
abounding in Wealth, they endeavour by all means to
draw into their Order. so that the main intention of
their school Discipline which is so famous throughout
the World, is, to uphold the Pope's sovereignty. They
boast of extraordinary methods to teach the Latin
Tongue to young people, but they take a particular
care, that they do not let their Disciples grow too wise,
except such as are to be received into their Order. And,
because, they have by this management of the Youths
brought a great many able Men over to their Order,
and are besides this very gentile and civil in their Conversation
(in which point they are far above all the other
Monks, who are most of them full of Incivility and
Pedantry) they have found means, under pretence of
being Confessours, to creep into most Courts, and
to insinuate themselves into the very secrets of the
state; so that in a great many Courts they have the
greatest sway in the Councils; And there you may be
sure they will never be forgetful of the Popes and their
own Interest. Nevertheless by their insatiable Avarice,
and forwardness of medling in all Affairs they have made
themselves odious in some places; And because the
Jesuits have trespassed upon the Authority and advantages
of the other Monks, who are of more antient
Orders, these are grown jealous of them to the highest
degree. Neither ought it to be passed by in silence,Licensing of Books. that the
Pope and his adherents pretend to have a right of Censuring
and Licensing all Books whatsoever, whereby
they may easily prevent that nothing may come to light,
which might prove prejudicial to them. And in Censuring
of Books they are so impudent as not only to
strike out of the antient Authors, when the same are
to be reprinted, at pleasure, such passages as they dislike,
but also they do not stick to insert such new passages

as are suitable to their intentions. If any Book is to be
published in their Territories first the same is exactly revised
and corrected. And if it should happen by chance,
that something should be overseen in the first Edition
which does not suit with their Interest, it is marked in
an Index made for that purpose, that it may be omitted
in the next Edition. But the Books of their Adversaries
are prohibited, nay the reading of them is not allowed,
but to some particular persons, and that not
without special leave, and these are such as they know
to be thorough-paced and intirely devoted to their Interest. 
By so doing they may lay to their Adversaries
charge what they please, since their subjects never get
sight of the others Refutation. It has been a general
observation, that since the scandalous life of the Monks
had not only been very prejudicial to the Popish Monarchy,
but also that the Protestants had set out their
Vices in their natural colours; The Papists have bespattered
the Protestant Ministers with the same Vices as they
were charged withal, and have not only representedthe
infirmities of some particular persons to the World,
but also have laid to their charge the most heinous
crimes they could invent; and afterwards have challenged
their Adversaries to prove the contrary; which Calumnies
have such influence, at least upon the simple and
common sort of People, that it gives them a great aversion
to the Protestants. They also do not want impudence
to set out at a high rate their Miracles, Martyrdoms
and other great Feats, which generally are
transacted in far distant Countries; by which means
they gain a great Credit at least by the inconsiderate
multitude. Among others Edwin sandys an English
Knight has discovered abundance of these tricks in his
Treatise concerning the state of Religion. § 36. Excommunication and Inquisition. The Pope also makes use of more violent means
to maintain his Authority; In former Ages his Excommunication
was a most terrible thing; when whole
Countries were forbidden the exercise of Religious
Worship; by which means the Popes have often obliged
Emperours and Kings to come and creep to the Cross. 
But now adays this Weapon is not frightful to any body

except to some petty states in Italy. Nevertheless in spain
and Italy they have set up a certain Court, which is called
the Office of the Holy Inquisition, where Information
is taken and all such proceeded against as have in any
ways tendred themselves suspected of Heresie: And it
is counted the worst sort of Heresie, if any one attempts
any thing against the Popish Law and Doctrine, or against
the Pope's Authority. This serves for a Bridle to
curb the People withal, and to the Inhabitants of those
Countries is as terrible as the Plague, since matters are
transacted with so much severity in this Court, that
scarce any body, that falls under the Inquisition, escapes
their hands without considerable loss. § 37. some Reasons why the People remain in the Communion of the Church of Rome. 
          Though the supreme Direction and Administration
of the Romish Religion, together with their
other rules, which serve to uphold it, and have been alledged
by us here, are a sufficient awe upon the People;
And besides this, the Popish Clergy know how to manage
their Affairs with that dexterity as to give some satisfaction
to every one; so that I am apt to believe, that
a great many, who live under the Popish subjection, are
verily persuaded, to believe, what the Priests tell them,
to be real, since they want means and opportunity of
being better instructed; Nevertheless it is very probable
that a great many of the more learned and wises sort
are sufficiently convinced, in what manner things are
carried on among them, and that therefore it is in respect
of same particular considerations, that they do not
free themselves from this Yoke. I am apt to believe,
that most are kept back, because they do not see how to
remedy this Evil; And yet they are unwilling to ruin
their Fortunes by going over to the Protestant side,
where they are not likely to meet with so plentiful a
share. These Temptations are not easily to be resisted,
wherefore they think it sufficient for the obtaining of
salvation if they believe in Jesus Christ and trust upon
his Merits, but for the rest think it of no great consequence
if in some matters, which are the inventions of
Priests, they by conforming themselves play the Hypocrite,
and believe as much concerning them as is suitable
with their Opinions. They suppose it to be of no

great consequence, that perhaps the Female sex and
the vulgar sort of People that are always fond of extravagancies,
do believe these things in good earnest. There
are also, questionless, not a few, who not having sufficient
Capacity to distinguish betwixt such Points in Religion,
as are commanded by God, and betwixt such as
are invented by the Clergy for private Ends, and perhaps
coming afterwards to the knowledge of some of
these deceits, they take all the rest for fabulous Inventions,
only covering their Atheistical Principles with an
outward decent behaviour to save themselves the trouble
of being questioned and disturbed. Every Man of
sense may without difficulty imagine how easily a sensible
Italian or spaniard, that never has read the Bible
or any other Protestant Book may fall into this Errour,
if he once has had an opportunity to take notice of the
Intrigues of the Clergy; tho' it is certain, that since the
Reformation of Luther, the Church of Rome has changed
her Habit, and her Garment appears far more decent
than before. But besides this, there are a great many
Persons of Quality as well as of a meaner Condition,
who make their advantage of the Romish Religion,
where they have an opportunity to provide for their
Friends, by putting them either into some Order or other
of Knighthood, or into that of Monks, or other
Ecclesiasticks, by which means a great many Families
are eased of a great Charge, and sometimes are raised
by it. At least the superstitious Parents are well satisfied
when they see their Children are become such saints:
And those that cannot make their Fortunes otherwise,
run into a Monastery, where they are sure to be provided
for. All these conveniences would be taken away
if the Popish Monarchy should fall, and the Church Revenues
were applyed to the use of the state. The Popish
Doctrine also has got so firm footing in those Countries
where it now rides triumphant, that if any of their
Princes should endeavour to root it out, he would find
it a very difficult Task, since the Priests would be for
raising Heaven and Earth against him, and not stick to
find out another James Clement or Ravilliac for their
purpose. Besides this, most of those Princes are tied by
a Political Interest to the Church of Rome, and by introducing

a Reformation cannot propose any advantage to
themselves, but rather cannot but fear very dangerous
Divisions and Innovations. § 38. What states are tied by a particular Interest to the Church of Rome. 
          
         Italy by its particular Interest is obliged to support
the Popish Monarchy, it being much to the advantage
of this Country, that the Pope resides among them,
especially since now a-days no other but Italians do attain
to this Dignity;Italy. so that there is scarce a great Family
in Italy, but some of their Friends have some dependence
on the Roman Chair. Poland. Because the Bishops
and Prebendaries in Poland are always chosen out of
the Nobility; the Noblemen who have the chief
sway of Affairs in that Kingdom are tied to the Popish Interest,
and the Bishops who are there also senators of the
Kingdom, have a great influence in all the Transactions
of any moment. Portugal. The Clergy is very Potent in Portugal,
and in case of any Innovation, would be assisted by the
spaniards; this was the reason why the Portugueses of
late years have been fain to comply with the Pope, notwithstanding
that the Pope to curry favour with spain,
did not many years ago treat them so ill in the matter
of Collation of Bishopricks, which else might have served
them for a fair Pretence, to withdraw themselves
from the Obedience of the Roman Chair. some of the Estates of Germany are to this day adhering
to the Popish Interest;Germany. among the Imperial Cities
that of Cullen is the Chiefest, which City is overrun
with Ecclesiasticks. Besides this, there are abundance
of Counts and others of the Nobility, that hitherto
have not thought fit by turning Protestants, to
exclude themselves from Ecclesiastical Dignities and Benefices. 
Among the Temporal Princes, the Elector of
Bavaria has stuck close to the Romish Religion, because
the House of Bavaria has always had a great Appetite
to the Imperial Crown, which hope it must lay aside, if
it should leave the Popish Religion. What has induced
some Protestant Princes to return to the Romish Communion,
is sufficiently known. Neither is it much to
be admired at, that the present Bishops and Prelates stand
firm to the Popish Interest in Germany, since they
find it more advantageous to be great Princes than

poor Preachers. Besides this, they have been deterred
from undertaking any Reformation by the Example of
two Electors of Collen, which they in the last Age did
begin with a very unfortunate success in their Dominions. 
After Charles V. (being influenced by the spanish
Counsels) did let slip the Opportunity of setling the
Protestant Religion throughout the Empire; the Emperours
have ever since that time, for reasons of state, not
been able to disentangle themselves from the Popish sovereignty
if they had been never so willing. For as the
case now stands, the Ecclesiastical Princes of the Empire
are tied to the Emperour's Interest, from whom they
hope for Assistance against the secular Princes in case
of necessity. But if the Emperour should abandon the
Church of Rome, the whole Clergy would be against
him; and he could not promise himself any certain Assistance
from the secular Princes, especially since some of
the most ancient Houses of those Princes, that now have
laid aside the hope of attaining the Imperial Crown, by
reason of difference in Religion, would then pretend to
have the same right to that Dignity with the House of
Austria. The Pope also upon such an occasion would
not cease to stir up Heaven and Earth against him, and
the King of France would not let slip this Opportunity,
but would with all his might endevour to obtain the
Imperial Dignity, in which design he perhap• might meet
with encouragement from the Clergy. The spaniards pretend to be the greatest zealots of the
Romish Religion,spain. because they stand in need of the
Pope's Favour to assist them in the preservation of the
Kingdom of Naples and the state of Milan; and they
commonly use to lay their Designs under the cover of
preserving and maintaining the Roman Catholick Religion,
wherein, however they have for the most part
miscarried, not to mention here that the Clergy is
very Potent in spain, and that the common People thro'
the false perswasions of the Priests, have got a great aversion
against the Protestants. France does outwardly shew it self not so fond of the
Popish Interest,France. nor has the Gallick Church ever acknowledged
the Pope's absolute Power over her. And whenever
the Pope pretends to encroach upon the Liberty of

the French Church, the Parliament of Paris is ready to
take notice of it. The Doctors also of the sorbon have
rejected several Propositions, which were maintained by
the Pope's Parasites. They also keep so watchful an Eye
over the Pope's Nuncio there, that it is not easy for him
to transgress his Bounds. The Nuncio's, when they go
out of Rome. carry the Cross upright, but as soon as
they enter the Territories of France, they let it down
till such time as they have obtained leave from the King
to exercise their Function, when they are fain to oblige
themselves by their own Hand-writing, that they will
not act otherwise in this station, and no longer than it
pleases the King. They also must make use of a French
secretary, and at their departure, leave behind them a
Register concerning their Negotiation, and also are tired
to several other Formalities, without which, all their
Negotiations are accounted void and of no force. Formalities observed by the Nuncio's in France. 
          From
hence it is that the French say, that the Pope's Nuncio
there, has his Commission both from their King and
the Pope, and that it is precarious, and may be recalled
by the King at pleasure. And it is to be observed that
the Pope's Nuncio pu•s by his Cross in any place where
the King is present, thereby it is intimated that his
Commission ceases when the King is present. Nay, it
is credibly related, that under the Ministry of Cardinal
Richlieu it was debated in France, whether they should
not constitute a Patriarch of their own in that Kingdom▪
tho' as far as I can see, this design would not
have proved so very advantageous to France. For the
Clergy, must needs have become very jealous of the
King's Power, for fear he might take this Opportunity
to retrench their ample Revenues. And if the King of
France has not laid aside his thoughts and pretences upon
the Imperial Crown, he can never suppose to obtain his
aim, if he should withdraw himself from the Roman
Chair. For if so Potent a Prince as the King of Franc•
          is,
should once obtain the Imperial Dignity, it is very likely
he would not only revive the antient Pretensions of the
Emperours upon Rome, which have for a long while
been lying dormant; but he would also under the specious
pretence of protecting the Roman Chair, endeavour
to recover such Possessions as had been •equestred

from the Church of Rome. On the other hand,
the Pope is heartily afraid of a French Monarchy, being
well convinced that it would endeavour a thorough
Reformation of the Court of Rome, and that his Wings
would be clipt to that degree, that in effect he would
be no more than a Patriarch. Neither ought he to exspect
any better treatment if the spanish Monarchy had
been brought to perfection; as either of them must
needs have been destructive to the Protestant Religion. It may therefore be taken for granted that one of the
main Pillars of the Popish Monarchy is the jealousy and
ballance,The main Pillar of the Popish Monarchy. which is to be kept up betwixt these two
Crowns; and that it is the Pope's Interest, as much as
in him lies, to take care that one of these Crowns do
not ruin the other, and set up for an universal Monarchy. 
If we look into the transactions of former times,
we shall find that the Popes have long since observed this
Maxim. 'Tis true, after the death of King Henry II. 
when France was extreamly weakned, the Popes were
forced to be good spanish whether they would or no,
the spaniards having then found out the way to oblige
them to it by fair or foul means. They knew how to
influence the Popes by their Nephews, who were for
setling and enriching their Families, whilest their Kinsmen
were alive. Those they brought over to their
party by granting to them Pensions, Church-Benefices,
large Possessions, great Offices and advantageous Marches;
who in acknowledgement of the same used often
to make the Pope good spanish, even against his inclination;
but if they resisted these temprations, they used to
prosecute these Nephews with a vengeance, after the
Pope's decease. And it was their constant practice in
those days, to exclude such from the Papal Chair, as
they thought were bent against their Interest. But as
soon as France began to recover its strength, the Popes
managed themselves with more indifferency, and shewed
no more favour to either side, than they thought was
suiting with their present Circumstances. It is remarkable
that the Jesuit Guicardus in a sermon preached in
Paris in the 1637. in the Month of July, did say, that
the War which the then King of France waged against

the spaniards, was to be deemed a Holy War, carried
on for the preservation of the Holy Religion. For if
the King of France had not taken up Arms, the spaniards
designs were so laid, as to make the Pope an Almoner
to the King of spain. 
        § 39. The Pope's In•lination towards the Protestants. But as to those who have withdrawn themselves
from the Pope's Obedience, it is certain the Pope would
be glad, if they could be reduced to his Obedience, provided
it might be done by such means, that thereby one
party were not so much strengthened as to become terrible
to all Europe. For it is better to let my Enemy
live, than to kill me and my Enemy at one stroke. It
was for this reason, that we read that Pope Paul III. was
vexed to the heart at the stupendous success of the Emperour
Charles V. against the Protestants, which made
him recall his Troops that were sent to his Assistance. 
And if Philip II. had been successful in his expedition against
England, sixtus V. would questionless have acknowledged
his Errour of assisting him in this Enterprise. 
so Gregory XV. during the Differences betwixt those of
the Valtelins and the Grisons sided with the last, the Protestants
against spain. Neither was Ʋrban VIII. dissatisfied
at the success of Gustavus Adolphus against the
House of Austria, especially since the latter had given
much about the same time an evident instance to the
World, as to the business of Mantua, that they used to
give no better treatment to Roman Catholicks than Protestants. 
some have remarked, that when Ferdinand II. 
did desire some subsidies from the Popes, which he had
promised before, the Pope sent him plenary Indulgences
for him and his whole Army at the point of death, that
they might be prepared to dye with the more Courage. 
And some Years ago, the Court of Rome was no less
concerned at the then prodigious success of France in
Holland, when this state seemed to be reduced to the utmost
extremity. But the chief aim of the Pope is, to
reduce by all manner of Artifices the Protestants to his
Obedience. To obtain this end, he sets the Protestants
together by the Ears, flattereth the Protestant Princes,
and takes care that many of them may marry Roman
Catholick Ladies; the younger Brothers out of the

greatest Families he obliges to come over to his Party,
by bestowing upon them great Dignities and Church-Benefices,
all that will come over to his side are kindly
received and very well used, neither do they write so
much against the Protestant Divines, but rather endeavour
to set up and maintain Controversies among them. 
By these Artifices the Popish Clergy had got very visible
advantages in this Age over the Protestants, and are likely
to get more every day, since they see with the greatest
satisfaction that their Adversaries do weaken themselves
by their intestine Quarrels and Divisions. § 40. From what has been said it is easily to be
judged,No Peace is to be exspected betwixt the Roman Catholicks and Protestants. whether those Differences which are on foot
betwixt the Roman Catholicks and the Protestants may
be amicably composed, either so that both Parties should
remit something of their pretensions, and agree to one and
the same Confession of Faith, leaving some by-Questions
to be ventilated in the Universities; or so that both
Parties may retain their Opinions, and yet, notwithstanding
this Difference, might treat one another like
Brethren in Christ and Members of the same Church. 
Now if we duly weigh the Circumstances of the matter,
and the Popish Principles, such a Peace is to be esteemed
absolutely impossible; since the Difference does not
only consist in the Doctrine, but both Interests are absolutely
contrary to one another. For first the Pope is for
having the Church-Possessions restored; but the Protestant
are resolved to keep them in their possession. The
Pope pretends to be the supreme Head of Christendom, but
the Protestants states will not part with their Prerogative
of having their Direction circa sacra, which they look
upon as a precious Jewel belonging to their sovereignty. 
And to pretend to live in Communion and Amity with
the Pope, and not to acknowledge his sovereignty in
Ecclesiastical Affairs, is an absolute contradiction. In
the same manner, as if I would be called a subject
in a Kingdom, and yet refuse to acknowledge the King's
Authority. Besides this, the infallibility of the Pope is
the Foundation stone of the Popish sovereignty, and if
that is once removed, the whole structure must needs
fall, wherefore it is impossible for the Pope, and that for

reasons of state, to abate any thing from his 〈◊〉
wherein he differs from the Protestants. For if it should
•e once granted that the Pope had hitherto maintained
but one single erroneous point, his infallibility would
them fall to the ground; since, if he has erred in one
point, he may be erroneous in others also. But if the
Protestants should allow the Pope's infallibility, they a•
the same time must deny their whole Doctrine. And it
seems not probable that the Protestants can ever be
brought to contradict and at once to recal their Doctrine
concerning the vanity of the Popish Tenets. Nay,
if it might be supposed that the Laiety should do it, what
must become of the Clergy? Where will they bestow
their Wives and Children? Wherefore, how good soever
the intention may have been of those that have proposed
a way of accommodation betwixt the Papists and
Protestants, which is commonly called syncretism, th•y
are certainly nothing else but very simple and chime•ical
Inventions, which are ridiculed by the Papists; who
in the mean while are well satisfied to see that the Protestant
Divines bestow their labour in vain as to this
point, since they (the Papists) are no loosers, but rather
the gainers by it. For this syncretism does not
only raise great Animosities among the Protestants, but
also does not a little weaken their Zeal against the Popish
Religion: It is easy to be imagined, that some, who
do not thoroughly understand the Differences, and hear
the Divines talk of an accommodation betwixt both Religions,
are apt to perswade themselves, that the Difference
does not lie in the fundamental points; and if in
the mean while they meet with an advantageous proffer
from the Roman Catholicks, are sometimes without great
difficulty prevailed upon to bid farewel to the Protestant
Religion. It is taken for a general Rule, that a
Fortress and a Maiden-head are in great danger, when
once they begin to parly. § 41. But if the Question were put,strength of the Protestants and Papists. whether the
Pope with all his adherents be strong enough to reduce
the Protestants under his Obedience by force; it is evident
enough that the joint power of the Papists is much
superiour to the strength of the Protestants. For Italy,
         
all spain and Portugal, the greatest part of France and
Poland, adhere to the Pope, as also the weakest part
of the swiss Can•ons. In Germany those hereditary Countries
which belong to the House of Austria, the Kingdom
of Bohemia, and the greatest part of Hungary, all
the Bishops and Prelates, the House of Bavaria, the Dukes
of Neuburgh, and Marquisses of Baden, besides some other
Princes of less note; some Coun•s, Lords and others
of the Nobility and some Imperial Cities, besides others
of the Roman Catholick Communion that live under
the Jurisdiction of the Protestant states; all which according
to my computation make up two thirds of Germany. 
There are also a great many Papists in Holland,
neither is England quite free of them. But of the Protestant
side are England, sweden, Denmark, Holland, most of
the secular Electors and Princes, and the Imperial Cities
in Germany. The Hugonots in France are without strength,
and the Protestants in Poland being dispersed throughout
the Kingdom are not to be feared. Curland and the Cities
of Prussia may rest satisfied, if they are able to maintain
the free exercise of their Religion; neither is Transylvania
powerful enough to give any considerable Assistance
to the Protestant Party. The Papists also have
this Advantage above the Protestants, that they all acknowledge
the Pope for the supreme Head of their
Church, and at least to outward appearance, are unanimous
in their Faith; whereas on the contrary, the Protestants
are not joined under one visible spiritual Head,
but are miserably divided among themselves. Divisions of the Protestants. For not
to mention here those sects of lesser note, viz. the Arminians,
socinians, Anabaptists and such like, their main Bod
is divided into two Parties, of very near equal strength,
viz. into the Lutherans and those of the Reformed Religion,
a great many of which are so exasperated against
one another, that they could not be more against the
Papists themselves. Neither are the Protestants united under one Church-Government
or Liturgy,Other Inconveniencies. but each of these states regulate
the same according as they think sit. Neither can
it be denied, but that the Roman Catholick Clergy in
general is more zealous and industrious in propagating
their Religion than the Protestants; a great many of

these making no other use the Church-Benefices, than
to maintain themselves out of them, just as if it were a
meer Trade; and the propagating of the Christian Faith,
is the least of their Care, or at least only their by-work. 
Whereas the Monks and Jesuits gain great applause by
their Missions in the East and West-Indies; and tho
perhaps they brag more than is true of their great success
there, yet is this Institution in the main very praise-worthy. 
Besides this, there is such an implacable jealousy
betwixt some of the Protestant states, that it is not
probable that they will be one and all against the Papists:
not to mention others here, such a jealousy is betwixt
sweden and Denmark. as likewise betwixt England
and Holland. Tho' on the other hand, there is as great
a jealousy betwixt France and spain, which will always
be an obstacle to any union betwixt these two Crowns
against the Protestants. so that notwithstanding the
unequality betwixt the Papists and Protestants, these need
not fear the Pope's Power. Nevertheless, there is a great difference to be made as
to those Protestants,The Hugono•s of France that live in a Protestant state, independent
on any other, and those who live under the jurisdiction
of a Roman Catholick Prince, the latter of
which are not so very well assured of the free enjoyment
of their Religion. For the Hugonoes in France have no
other security but the King's bare Word, and the Edict
of Nantes, which would stand them but in little stead,
if the King of France should be overcome with a Zeal
like to that of the spaniards, or the House of Austria. 
Yet does it not seem probable to me, that the King of
France should easily pretend to force them to another
Religion, as long as they are quiet; since he ought to
consider what great services the Hugonots have done to
Henry IV. without whose Assistance he would in all
likelihood not have been able to obtain the Crown. to Protestants of Poland. 
          It
is not easily to be supposed, that the Poles should raise a
persecution against the Protestants in Curland and Prussia,
especially as long as the City of Dantzick maintains her
Liberty. The Protestants in Germany are so considerable,Of Germany. that
they may be esteemed equal in strength to a Kingdom. 
But their being divided under several Heads, and that

of a different Interest, much abates their strength. And
the Emperours within the space of a hundred Years, have
twice reduced them to that extremity, that both their
Religion and Liberty (which are so linked together,
that one cannot be lost without the other) seemed to be
near gone, if France and sweden had not prevented it. 
'Tis true, there has of late Years a new Maxim been
set up, viz that the Protestants of Germany are now in
a capacity to maintain themselves without the assistance
of the two above-mentioned Crowns, and that
the Elector of Brandenburgh is the most fitly qualified to
be their Head, and to have the Direction among them:
And as it is the Interest of the House of Austria to uphold
them in this belief, so Brandenburgh and Luneburgh
make use of this supposition to cover their designs of getting
into their possession those Provinces, that were
given to sweden as a recompence for having been so instrumental
in preserving the Religion and Liberty of
the Protestants of Germany. But suppose they should compass
their Design, it is most certain that those two Houses
by the addition of those Countries, would be much less
formidable to the Emperour, than they were at that
time when they were upheld by sweden. And it is a
great mistake if they perswade themselves that what assistance
they may exspect from Denmark and Holland,
can countervail what they had from France and sweden. 
If the Emperour should obtain his Ends and drive
those two Nations out of Germany, and restore the spanish
Interest, and then tire out the Estates by sending
great Armies against them, it would be a question who
would be able to oblige the Emperour in such a case to
disband his victorious Forces? Or whether the Emperours
might not under some pretence or another keep
his Army on foot, and oblige the states to provide for
them in their Territories? Whether Brandenburgh and
Lunenbuhgh would be able alone to oppose the Emperour's
design? But if the Protestant Estates should find
themselves not strong enough to resist his Power, it
would be the Question whether these Crowns would
be immediately ready at their demands, or whether
the circumstances of their Affairs would be such, as to
be able to undertake such a task? Or whether at the time

of imminent danger such a one as Gustaous Adolfus,
would be sent down from Heaven, who could act with
the same Fortune and success. For he that believes,
that the Religion is sufficiently secured by seals and
Deeds, or that the Emperours have laid aside all thoughts
of making themselves sovereigns of Germany, if an occasion
should present it self, especially since Religion,
and the recovery of the Church possessions furnishes
them with so specious a pretence, must needs have lost
the memory of all past transactions. But the last Peace
made at Nimmeguen has sufficiently convinced the
World, that these designs could not be put in execution. 
Those Protestant states therefore that are Independent
on other Princes need not fear the power of the
Roman Catholicks. For, as two states that are of the
same Religion, nevertheless differ in state Interests, and
are jealous of one another, which is plainly to be seen
betwixt France and spain, and betwixt England and
Holland; so, though states are of a different Religion,
it is not from hence to be concluded, that if a Potent
Prince of the Roman Catholick Persuasion should attempt
to ruin a Protestant state, the other Roman Catholick
states would not prevent it, if it was for their
Interest to see that Protestant state preserved. The best way then to preserve the Protestant Religion
is,The best way to preserve the Reformed Religion. that each of these states take effectual care,
how the same may be well preserved in their several
states. And this may be done without any crafty inventions,
as the Roman Catholicks are obliged to make
use of, but only by plain and simple means. One of the
main Points is, that both the Churches and schools
may be provided with persons fitly qualified for that
purpose; That the Clergy by their wholesome Doctrine
and a good Life, may shew the way to the rest. 
That the people in general, but more especially such as
in all likelyhood one time or another may have a great
sway in the state, be well instructed in the true and
Fundamental Principles of the Protestant Religion, that
thereby they may be proof against the Temptations of
the Court of Rome, especially when they are to Travel
in Popish Countries. That the Clergy may be so qualified
as to be able to oppose the devises and designs of their

E•••ies, who every day busie themselves in finding out
new Projects against them. some are of Opinion, that the Protestant Party would
be mightily strengthned, if the two Chief Factions among
the Protestants,Whether the Lutherans and those of the Reformed Religion are likely to agree. that besides the difference in their Doctrine,
are also of a different Interest, which seems to
flo•• from their various Opinions, could be reconciled
to one another; and they believe this not impracticable,
if the old hatred, animosities, pride, and selfconceited
Opinions could be laid aside. But if we duly take into
consideration the general inclinations of mankind,
this seems to be a hard supposition. For those who
peruse the Writings of both Parties without partiality
cannot but admire, how their Authors are often obliged
to rack themselves, that they may maintain their Opinions
whether they be consonant to the scriptures or
not: As likewise how they bring to light again the old
Arguments, which have been refuced a thousand times
before. Neither will this do the business, if one Opinion
should be supposed as good as the other; since such
an indifferency would be a shrewd sign, that the whole
must needs be very indifferent to us. Neither can we
without danger declare some Points, in which we differ,
problematical, since I do not see how we can pretend
to have a power to declare a certain Article either
necessary or Fundamental, or problematical. some
therefore have thought upon this expedient, to make a
tryal, whether out of the Articles, wherein both Parties
agree could be Composed a perfect systeme of Divinity,
which might be linked together like one Chain,
according to Art. If this could be effected, though
some different Opinions remained, as long as this Chain
was kept entire, we might be assured that we did not
differ in the Fundamental Points necessary to the obtaining
of salvation; and what remained undecided would
not be of such Consequence as to hinder us from being
united into one Body or Church. But before a true
Judgment can be given of this Proposition, it would
be requisite that such a systeme composed according
to Art, were proposed to the World. For my part I know
no better advice, than to leave it to the direction of
God Almighty, who perhaps one time or another will

put us in the way of finding out a good Expedient. 
For untimely remedies may prove the occasion of new
Divisions. In the mean while it behoves both Parties
notwithstanding these differences to be mindful of their
joint Interest against their Common Enemy, since they
may verily believe that the Pope has no more kindness
for the Lutherans, than for those of the Reformed Religion. But as for the other sects of less note,socinians and Anabaptists. 
         viz. The
socinians, Anabaptists, and such like, it is evident that
their Principles cannot possibly be reconciled with our
Religion; For those who adhere to the first, do not consider
the Christain Doctrine otherwise than a Moral
Philosophy, and the latter scarce know what to believe
themselves. Besides this, the Anabaptists have hatched
out I know not what rules of Policy, which, if not
suppressed in time, must prove destructive to the state. 
But whether the socinians also have any such projects in
their Heads, I am not able to determine, since hitherto
they have not been powerful enough to raise any disturbances
in the state. CHAP. XIII. Of the Kingdom of sweden. § 1. THE swedish Historians have out of their
ancient Monuments shown the World,sweden the most antient Kingdom in Europe. 
         
that the Kingdom of sweden is the most
antient Kingdom in Europe, and that
this Country, was, after the Deluge, sooner stored with
Inhabitants than the other parts of Europe. Nevertheless
it is very uncertain who were the first Inhabitants,
and at what time they first settled there, as likewise
whether they were immediately governed by Kings, or
whether the Fathers of Families, had the chief sway
among them, till the Regal was grafted on the Paternal
Power. The names and deeds of their Kings, and the
time of their Reigns are also not easie to be determined,
for the List which has been published of these Kings, is
not so Authentick, but that it may be called in question;
And, as to the transactions of those times, they are most
of them taken out of antient songs and Fabulous Legends,
and some of them out of the allegorical Traditions
of their antient Poets or scalders, which have perhaps
been wrongly interpreted by some Authors. And Johannes
Messenius in his scandinavia Illustrata, does not
stick to say, that the old swedish Historiographer Johannes
Magnus did strive to outdo in his bragging History,
the Danish Historian sanno Grammaticus. 
         First Founders of the Gothick Nation. 
         Johannes
Magnus Makes Magog, the son of Japhet Grandson
of Noah, the first Founder of the schytick and Gothick
Nations, and says that from his two sons sweno,
and Gether and Geg, the swedish and Gothish Nations had
their names. He relates, that after this Family was extinguished,
sweden was during the space of four hundred
years under the Government of certain Judges,
and that about eight hundred years after the Deluge,
both the Kingdoms of the swedes and Gothes were united

under Bericus, who in person planted a Colony of
the Gothes beyond the seas, after having Conquered
the Ʋlmirugii, who then inhabited Prussia, from whence
he extended his Conquests over the Vandals. A considerable
time after, these Nations did settle themselves
not far from the Mouth of the River Danube near the
Black sea, from whence having under taken several Expeditions
both into Asia and Europe, at last in the third
and fourth Centuries after the Birth of Christ, did enter
the Roman Provinces on this side of the Danube, and
carried their Conquering Arms into Italy and spain,
where they erected two Kingdoms. But the greatest
part of this Relation is contradicted by Messenius,
who also rejects the List which Johannes Maginis h••
given us, of the Kings before our soviour's Birth, alledging
that the times before Christ's Nativity, are all
involved in fabulous Narrations, as to those Northern
parts, and that most of these Kings lived after the
Birth of our s•viour. But, since even the Chronology
of the first 〈◊〉 after Christ's Nativity, and the
Genealogy of those Kings it somewhat uncertain in
these Contries, it will suff•ce to mention here some
few of the most famous among them, till the latter
times furnish us with an opportunity to relate things
with more certainty. § 2. sixty years before the Birth of Christ, the famous
Othin or Woden,
         Othin or Woden. having been driven by Pomp•y
out of Asia with a great number of people, first Conquered
Bussas, afterwards the saxons and Danes, and
last of all Norway and sweden, about twenty four years
before Christ's Birth. Othin kept for himself sweden only,
yet so, that all the other scandinavian Princes should
own him a• their supreme Lord, from whence came
that Custom which was used for several hundred years
after, viz. That at the great and general meetings of
these Nations, the King of Denmark used to hold the
Bridle of the King of sweden's Horse, whilst he mounted
it, and the King of Norway the stirrup. He was succeeded
by Frotho surnamed. Frotho. 
         Jorgo, who covered the
Temple at Ʋpsal with Gold, and surrounded its Pinacle
with a golden Chain. After him were these following

Kings Niord, sigtrug, Asmund, Ʋffo, Hynding, Regner,
Halvard, Helgo, Attilus, Hother, Roderick surnamed
singabond, Hogmor, and Hogrin, Erick, Haldan, sivand,
Erick, Haldan, Ʋngrin, Regnald. About the year 588. 
Rodolf was King of the Gothes, but being vanquished by
the English, whom he left in the possession of that Kingdom,
he himself fled into Italy, where he sought sanctuary
of Dicterick the King of the Gothes. In the mean
while Frotho, either the son, or else a Kinsman of
Regnald, was King of sweden, whom succeeded these
following Kings Fiolmus, swercher, Valander, Vislur,
who was burnt by his own sons. Damalder, who was
sacrificed by his own subjects to their Idol at Ʋpsal. 
Domar, Digner, Dager, Agnius, who was hanged by
his own Wife. Alrick and Erick, who flew one another
in a single Combat, Ingo, Hugler, Haco, Jerundar,
Hacquin surnamed Ring, under whose Reign that most
memorable Battel at Brovalla was fought,Battel fought near Brovalla. 
          betwixt the
swedes and Danes, where thirty thousand Men were
killed on the Danish, and twelve thousand on the
swedish side. This King sacrificed nine of his sons to
the Idol at Ʋpsal, and would have done the same with
the tenth, who was the only Heir left to the Kingdom,
if he had not been prevented by the swedes. Him succeeded
his son Egillus, whom followed in the Kingdom
of sweden, Othar, Adel, Ostan, Ingvard, Amund, sivard,
Hirot or Herolt, who married his Daughter Thera
to Regnerthethen King of Denmark. 
         Ingellus. 
         Ingellus the son of
Amund, succeeded Hirot in the Kingdom of sweden;
who, the night after his Coronation caused seven of
those petty Princes, that were Vassals of the Crown
of sweden to be burnt in their Lodgings; and afterwards
exercised the same Cruelty against five more of
the same Rank. His Daughter Asa, that was married
to Gudrot a Prince of schonen, exceeded her Father in
Cruelty, for having murthered her Husband and his Brother,
she betrayed the Country to the Enemies; which
so exasperated Ivan, the son of Regner, King of Denmark,
that he fell with great fury upon Ingellus, who
had taken his Daughter into his Protection, destroying
all with Fire and sword. Ingellus being reduced to the
utmost extremity, by the advice of his Daughter

burnt himself, his Daughter, and the whole Family, in
his own Palace, except his son Olaus, who sheltered
himself in Wermeland. After the death of Ingellus, a
certain Nobleman, of an antient Family in sweden,
whose name was Charles, assumed the Royal Title and
Power, but Regner King of Denmark, who pretended
that it belonged to his son, did send a challenge to
the said Charles, and having killed him in the Combat,
transferred the Kingdom of sweden to his son Bero or
Biorn, who was Hirots Daughters son. § 3. Bero. Under the Reign of this Bero or Biorn, Ansgarius,
a Monk of Corvey,
         A. C. 829. and afterwards Bishop of Bremen,
was sent into sweden,
         The Christian Doctrine first taught in sweden. 
          by the Emperour Lewis the
Pious, to Preach the Gospel in that Kingdom. But the
King refusing to hearken to his Doctrine, was by the
swedes banished the Kingdom, together with his Father
Regner. 
         Amund. His successor Amund did also Rule but a very
few years, and having raised a most horrible Persecution
against the Christians, was also banished the Kingdom. 
The swedes being quite tired out with Amund's
tyrannical Government,Olaus. did call in Olaus, out of
Wermeland to be their King, who to establish himself
in the Throne, married the Daughter of Regner to his
son Ingo, and thereby obtained the quiet possession of
the two Kingdoms of the swedes and Gothes. 
         A. C. 853. Not many
years after Ansgarius rerurned into sweden, and Converted
Olaus, (who then resided at Birca a most populous
City) to the Christian Faith. Olaus then marched
with a Potent Army into Denmark, and having committed
the Administration of that Kingdom to his son
Ennigruus, returned into sweden; where he was by his
Heathen subjects sacrificed to their Idol at Ʋpsal. His
son Ingo,
         Ingo. the better to Establish himself in the Throne,
married the King of Denmark's Daughter,A. C. 890. and afterwards
was killed in the War against the Russians. Him
succeeded his son Erick surnamed Weatherhat,
         Erick. famous for
his skill in Witchcraft, who was succeeded by his son
Erick surnamed seghersell,
         Erick seghersell. who Conquered Finland,
Curland, Livonia, and Ehestland From Denmark he
retook Halland and schonen, and at last drove the
Danish King swen out of Denmark, who could not recover

his Kingdom till after his death. stenchill the Mild. His son stenchill,
surnamed the Mild, was Baptized at sigtuna
(a great City at that time) and having destroyed the Idol
at Ʋpsal, and forbid his subjects upon pain of death to
sacrifice to the Idols, the Pagans were so enraged thereat,
that they slew and burnt him near Ʋpsal, and with
him the two Christian Priests that were sent to him by
the Bishop of Hamburgh. 
         Olaus. His Brother Olaus nevertheless
obtained from King Etheldred of England several Christain
Priests, who not only preached the Gospel in
sweden, but also the King, and a great number of People
were Baptized by one of these called sigfried in a
Fountain called Husbye, which is called st. sigfrieds
Kalla Wel to this day. This Olaus was surnamed skotkonung,
because upon the persuasion of the English
Priests he granted to the Pope a yearly Tax against the
saracens, which was called Romskot. This Olaus took
from Oluf Tryggeso the Kingdom of Norway, which he
however recovered afterwards. This Olaus skotkonung
was also the first who made a perfect union betwixt the
two Kingdoms of the swedes and Gothes,
         The swedes and Gothes united in one Kingdom. who had hitherto
been often at great enmity with one another. To Olaus succeeded his son Amund, under whose
Reign the Christian Religion increased very succesfully
in sweden;
         Amund. after whom Reigned his Brother Amund,
surnamed slemme,
         Amund slemme. a Man very negligent both in maintaining
Religion and Justice. He was slain with the
greatest part of his Army by Cnut King of Denmark,
near a Bridge called strangepelle. After his death the
Gothes and swedes disagreed about the Election of a
new King,Haquin the Red. the first choosing Haquin surnamed the Red. 
the latter stenchill the younger. At last it was agreed
betwixt them, that Haquin being pretty well in years
should remain King during his life, and should be succeeded
by stenchill. After the death of Haquin, who
Reigned thirteen years,stenchill. 
         stenchill the younger, Olaus
skotkonung's sisters son, began his Reign, who vanquished
the Danes in three great Battels. Him succeeded
Ingo surnamed the Pious. 
         Ingo the Pious. This King utterly
destroyed the Idol at Ʋpsal, which so enraged his Pagan
subjects, that they Banished him the Kingdom,
and afterwards murthered him in schonen, he was buried

in a Convent called Wa•hei••
          in West-Gothland. After
him reigned with great applause his Brother Halstan,
         Halstan. 
whom succeeded his son Philip
         A. C. 
         Ingo, Philip's son,
and his Queen Ragoild,
         1086. were also very famous for their
Piety and other Vertues:Philip. Ingo. she was after her death
honoured as a saint,A. C. and her Tomb frequently visited at
Talge. 
         1138. This King left no sons, but two Daughters,
Christina and Margret, the first was married to st. Erick,
the second to Magntis King of Norway. He was
poisoned by the East Gothes, who were grown weary of
the swedish Government. Under the Reign of these
five last Kings there were golden times in sweden, the
Christian Faith was then Established and the subjects
lived in Peace and Plenty. § 4. After the death of Inge, the East Gothes, without
the consent of the other Provinces, made one
Ragwald Knaphofde,
         Ragwold Knaphofde. a Man of great bodily strength,
but of no great Wisdom, their King, who was slain
by the West Gothes. In his stead the East Gothes chose
swercher II. swercher II. 
          a very good King, who nevertheless was
murthered by one of his servants. After the death of
swercher, the East Gothes chose his son Charles for
their King, but the sw•des at their General Assembly at
Ʋpsal Elected Erick the son Josward,
         Erick the Holy. he having married
Christina the Daughter of Ingo surnamed the Pious. 
But both the swedes and Gothes considering afterwards,
how necessary it was to keep up the Union betwixt
these two Kingdoms, made an agreement that Erick
should remain King over both Kingdoms, but that
Charles should succeed him, and that afterwards their
Heirs should Rule the Kingdom in the same manner in
their several turns. This Erick having reduced the
Finns to their former Obedience, obliged them to receive
the Christian Doctrine. A. C. He also ordered the antient
Constitutions of the Kingdom to be Collected into
one Book,1154. which was called after his name st. Erick's
Law. He was slain in the Meadows near Ʋpsal by
Magnus the King of Denmark's son, who having first
defeated his Army, was proclaimed King. 1160. But the
swedes and Gothes under the Conduct of Charles the son
of swercher, fell again with such fury upon the Danes,
         
that they killed all the Danes with their King and his
son upon the spot, and out of the spoil built a Church
near Ʋpsal which they called Denmark,
         Charles the son of swercher. 
         Charles therefore,
the son of swercher became King of Denmark,
who Reigned with a general applause;1168. till Cnut the
son of Erick returned out of Norway,
         Cnut Erickson. and under pretence
that he had abetted his Father's death, surprised
and killed him. His Lady and Children fled into Denmark,
where having got some assistance they joined
with the Gothes under the Conduct of Kell, the Brother
of Charles, to recover the Kingdom, but their
General was killed upon the spot, and their Forces
dispersed by Cnus Erickson. After which he Reigned
very peaceably for the space of twenty three years. 
After the death of Cnut,
         swercher III. 
          
         swercher the son of Charles
was made King of swedeland, but had for his Rival
Erick, the son of the last deceased King. At last the
difference was thus Composed, that swercher should
remain King during his life, but should be succeeded by
Erick. But swercher, who notwithstanding this agreement
was for settling the Crown upon his Family, did
barbarously murther all the sons of Cnut, except Erick,
         1207. 
who escaped into Norway; from whence he returned
with some Forces, and being assisted by the swedes
vanquished swercher, who fled into West Gothland. 
Having obtained succours of sixteen thousand Men,
from Weldemar, the King of Denmark, he attempted
to recover his Kingdom, but was miserably beaten by
Erick's Army, he himself narrowly escaping into
Denmark;
         1208. from whence he not long after again fell into
West Gothland,
         1210. but was again defeated and slain in
the Battel,Erick Cnutson. Leaving Erick Cnutson in the quiet possession
of the Throne, who renewed the former agreement
made betwixt those two Families, and Constituted
John the son of swercher his successour in the Kingdom. 
He married Ricnet the sister of Waldemar King
of Denmark,
         1219. and dyed in Wisingsoe. Him succeeded
according to agreement, John the son of swercher, who
Reigned but three years and dyed also in the Isle of
Wisingsoe, which was the general place of residence of
the swedish Kings in those days. 
§ 5. Erick Lespe. After the death of John, Erick, the son of the
former King Erick, became King of sweden, who being lame,
and besides this lisping, was surnamed the
Lisper. There was about that time a very Potent Family
in sweden called the Tolekungers, who aimed at the
Crown. To bring these over to his Party the King had
married three of his sisters to three of the Chiefest among
them, he himself having married Catharine the
Daughter of sweno Tolekunger. But these being grown
more Potent by this Alliance; Cnut Tolekunger rebelled
against the King, and having worsted him, obliged him
to fly into Denmark; from whence he soon returned
with a strong Army and vanquished Tolekunger, and
having caused him and Halingar his son to be slain, restored
the Peace of the Kingdom. Under the Reign
of this King it was that Gulielmus sabinensis the Pope's
Legat did first forbid the Priests in sweden to Marry,
whereas before that time it had been a common Custom
among the Priests there to Marry,Celibacy of Clergy introduced in sweden. 
          as well as
Laymen. This Erick under the Conduct of his Brother
in Law Birger Yerl forced the Finnes to return to
Obedience, and to receive the Christian Faith, and
built several Fortresses upon their Frontiers. 1250. He dyed
without Issue in Wisingsoe. Whilst Birger Yerl was absent
in Finland,
         Waldemar. the states made Waldemar the eldest
son of Birger Yerl their King, as being the deceased
King's sisters son:1251. Who being Crowned in the year next
following, the Administration of the Kingdom was
committed during his minority to his Father Birger, who
augmented the antient Law Book, and deserved so well
of the Publick, that upon the request of the Estates he
was created a Duke, whereas before he had been only
an Earl, or as it is in their antient Language Yerl. He
met with great opposition from the Tolekungers, who
had not quite laid aside their pretensions to the Crown,
so that their jealousie at last broke out into open War. 
But the Duke, under pretence of making an agreement
with them, after having granted them a safe Conduct
persuaded them to give him a meeting, where having
made them all Prisoners caused them to be Executed,
except Charles Tolekunger who fled into Prussia, and remained

there all his life time. Things being thus settled,
he gave to his son, in Marriage, sophia the Daughter
of Erick King of Denmark,
         1263. and laid the first foundation
of the Castle and City of stockholm; and tho his son
was become of Age, yet did he never surrender the Government
to him as long as he lived. 1266. He died after he
had been Regent fifteen years, leaving four sons, Waldemar
King of sweden, Magnus Duke of sudermanland,
Erick of smaland, and Benedict of Finland, who afterwards
raised great Disturbances: for Waldemar having,
during his Pilgrimage to Rome and Jerusalem, left the
Administration of the Kingdom to his Brother Magnus,
at his return accused him of having aimed at the Crown. 
The states of sweden held an Assembly at strengness to compose
these differences if possible;1275. but met with so much
difficulty that it was impossible to be effected. Wherefore
Magnus and Erick being retired into Denmark, soon
returned from thence with a considerable Force; and
having routed the Vanguard of King Waldemar, made
him their Prisoner. Whereupon Magnus called together
the Estates of the Kingdom; who being most of them
of his Party, did assign the whole Kingdom to Duke
Magnus, except only East and West Gothland, smaland
and Daht, which the King was to have for his share. 
But this Agreement lasted not long; for the Danes,
who had not received their subsidies promised by Magnus,
siding with Waldemar, the War was renewed,
which was carried on with various success; till at last
the Danes, having received satisfaction for the Money
due to them, left Waldemar in the lurch, who, in the
presence of the Estates, resigned the Kingdom to Magnus. 
        § 6. Magnus. 
         Waldemar having resigned the Kingdom, Magnus
was crowned at Ʋpsal:
         1279. who resumed the Title of
King of the swedes and Goths, which had not been used
by his Predecessors ever since the time of Olaus skotkanung,
but is since retained by the Kings of sweden to
this day. Under this King's reign the Family of the
Tolekungers began to raise new Commotions, and being
assisted by some of the Nobilty, murthered Ingemar
Danschkep the King's Favourite, and took Gerhard the

E. of Holstein and Father-in-law to the K. Prisoner, laying
also close siege to the Castle of Joncoring; which obliged
the K. to appea•e them for that time by fair Promises:
but not long after the E. was released, the K. accused them
before the Assembly of the Nobility of High Treason, and
caused them all to be executed at stockholm, except Philip
of Runby, who was fain to redeem his Life at a very
dear Rate. And with this stroke the Greatness of the
Family of the Tolekungers was quite laid in the dust. 
Having thus settled his Affairs, he got his Lady Hederig
crowned at suderasping; and, with the advice of the
senators, made King Waldemar a Prisoner in the Castle
of Nicoping,
         1288. where he died four years after. Magnus
died in Wisignioc,
         1290. but was buried at stockholm in the
Church of the Grey Friars, having left the Tuition of
his son Birger, who was but eleven years of age, and
the Care of the Kingdom to Torckell C•utson the RixMarshal. 
Torckell Cnutson was Regent for the space of
thirteen years,Birger II. 
          during which time he also imprisoned
King Waldemar's son; but after their decease he sent
an Army into Car•lia, and having subdued this Nation,
and induced them to receive the Christian Faith, he
built on their Frontiers the Fortress of Wibourg, and
took from the Russians Kekhelm. 
         1292. King Birger being by
this time come to his riper Years, married Mereta the
Daughter of Erick King of Denmark; and having sent
new forces into Carelia and Ingermania,
         1298. built the Fortress
of Norburgh on the Frontiers of Russia, which however
a few years after was retaken and demolished by the
Russians. soon after he declared his son Magnus, who
was but three years old his successor in the Kingdom,1303. 
which was confirmed by the chief Men of the Kingdom,
and especially by his Brothers. But this solemn Transaction
was of no long continuance, for the Brothers
quickly fell into divisions among themselves, and the
two younger growing mistrustful of the King, the Marshal
retired first into Denmark, and from thence into
Norway, to make use of that King's Intercession to recover
their Inheritance, which King Birger had seised
upon; but all this proving ineffectual, they made several
Inroads into West-Gothland, and killed and dispersed the
swedish Troops that were sent to oppose them. The

King went at last in person with an Army, and was met
by his Brothers with some Forces, which they had obtained
of the King of Norway; when by the Intercession
of some senators, the Differences betwixt the Brothers
were composed, and the two younger restored to
their Estates in sweden. This Agreement cost the old
Torcell his Head,1305. who, under pretence of having upheld
the Ammosities betwixt the Brothers, and some other
matters laid to his charge, was beheaded at stockhelm. 
But no sooner was this Wise Man dead, but the two
younger Brothers began to aim again at the Crown, and
having surprised the K. and Q. at their Country seat
called Hatuna forced him to resign the Kingdom, and to
surrender the Crown and City of stockholm to his Brother
Erick, who made the King a Prisoner in the Castle of
Nicoping; but his son Magnus was, during this Tumult,
carried into Denmark. The King of Denmark undertook
3 several Expeditions to relieve his Brother-in-law and
sister, but to no great purpose, only that at last it was agreed,
that the King, Queen and their Children should
be set at liberty, and the matter decided in the Assembly
of the senate of the Kingdom. The senate therefore
having been called together at Ar•oga, it was there concluded,
That in case King Birger would pardon all past
Injuries, and be contented with what part of the Kingdom
should be assigned to him, he should be set at liberty:
which was performed accordingly, the senate
and his Brothers having again sworn fealty to him. 
Thus matters seemed to be composed for the present,
when not long after a greater storm broke out. 1308. 
         Erick
the King of Denmark, having made an Alliance with
Haquin King of Norway, came with an Army of 60000
Men into sweden, to assist King Birger in bringing his
Brothers under his subjection: their first success was
answerable to their great Preparations, having taken
Joncoping, and forced the Duke's Forces to fly before
them; but the Danes, who began to be in want of Provision,
being most of them gone home, there was a
Meeting appointed betwixt the Brothers to be held at
Helsinburgh, where the former Agreement made at A•
           bega
was renewed; by virtue of which Duke Erick, was
to have West Gothland, Daht, Halland, Wermeland,
         
and smal•nd; Duke Waldemar was to have for his share
Ʋpland, Oeland and part of Finland; the rest was to remain
under the King, and the Dukes to hold their Possessions
in Fief from him. Thus all Animosities seemed
to be laid aside, and the three Brothers lived in great
splendor, striving to out-do one another in Magnificence;
which occasioning some new Taxes, proved also
the occasion of some Insurrections in the Kingdom,
which were nevertheless happily appeased, and Peace
restored to the whole Kingdom. In the mean while Duke Waldemar in his journey
from Calmar to stockholm, gave a visit to the King at
Nycoping, who not only treated him with extraordinary
Civility, but also desired him to return and bring his
Brother along with him, by which means he hoped that
the very seeds of their former Animosities betwixt them
might be rooted out. 
         1317. 
         Waldemar, being overcome by these
fair Promises, over-persuaded his Brother Erick, who
was very averse to it at first, but at last consented. Being
arrived in the Castle where the King was, they were
kindly received and splendidly entertained at supper;
but they had not been long in bed, and most of their
servants dispersed into several Quarters of the Town,
till they were made Prisoners, beaten, abused, and half
naked, loaden with Irons, thrown into a strong Tower,
their servants having been all either killed or taken Prisoners. 
The King marched directly for stockholm, in
hopes to surprise the City; but the News of this barbarous
act having been already carried to stockholm, they
not only repulsed him, but also pursued him to Nycoping. 
The King perceiving that they intended to besiege Nycoping,
retired to stockeburgh; but before his departure,
having caused the Doors of the Prison to be barricadoed
up, he threw the Keys into the River, and commanded
upon pain of death, not to open the Doors till his return. 
soon after Nycoping was besieged, but before it
could be forced both the Brothers died by Famine. King
Birger having by this Treacherous fact animated the
whole Kingdom against him, sought for Aid in Denmark;
and having obtained some Forces, shifted with them
from place to place, till some of them were suprized at
sudercoping, and the Danish Horse having also left Nycoping,
         
the King, destitute of all, retired with the Queen
into Gethland, leaving his son Magnus in the Castle of
stegeburgh. The swedes having immediately after invested
the Place, forced it to surrender by Famine, and
sent Magnus a Prisoner to stockholm. The senate of the
Kingdom made there Matthew 〈◊〉
          Regent of
sweden,
         1319. who vigorously prosecuted the Remnants of the
King's Party, which obliged King Birger to seek for shelter
to Christopher King of Denmark. 
        § 7. Magnus smocck. After K. Birger had left Gothland, the Estates assembled
at Ʋpsal, chose for their King Magnus the son of
D. Erick being then but 3 years old. The Year next following
Magnus the son of K. Birger, notwithstanding
that the senate and Estates of the Kingdom had sworn
Fealty to him as to their future King, was villainously
sentenced to death and beheaded accordingly, and King
Birger and his Queen died soon after for Grief. But the
swedes, who had conceived great hopes of their new
King, found themselves extreamly deceived in their Expectation
after the death of of Ketelmundson, who at first
managed affairs with great Prudence. For the King being
now of age married Blanch the Daughter of an Earl
of Namur, and laying aside the old Counsellors made
use of the Advice of his young Favourites, among whom
one Benedict born in West-Gothland had the chief place. 
The Inhabitants of schonen being sorely oppressed by
the Holsteiners, put themselves under his protection,
which was afterwards confirmed by Waldemar King of
Denmark, and the sound, by common consent, made
the common Borders of these two Kingdoms on that side. 
After he had ruled twelve years in peace, he undertook
an Expedition against the Russians, which succeeded
very ill, being obliged to redeem the peace by the surrender
of a part of Carelia. His Treasury having by
this War been mightily exhausted, he not only imposed
new and heavy Taxes upon the people, but also pawned
a great many of the Crown Lands. Pope Clement VI. 
also had excommunicated him because he had applied
the Revenues of s. Peter, given to the Roman Chair
by Olaus skotkonung, to the use of the Russian War. 
The People being extreamly discontented at these Proceedings,

the sena•e perswaded the King that he should
cause his two sons to be declared Kings, viz. Brick of
sweden, and Haquin of Norway, which was done accordingly. 
The Nobility being now headed by a new
King▪ began to withdraw from their obedience to the
old King, and killed his Favourite Benedict. The King
who now began to see his Errors, sought for Aid from
the King of Denmark, which so exasperated the Nobility,
that they obliged the young King to take up Arms
against his Father, which occasioned a bloody War, till
at last the Kingdom was divided betwixt them, the Father
having got Ʋpland, Gothland, Wermeland, Dabt,
North-Halland,
         1357. 
         West-Gothland and Ocland. But sh•••n,
Bleckingen, south-Halland, East-Gothland, smaland and
Finland fell to the son's share. But notwithstanding this agreement, the jealousie continued
betwixt the Father and son, and not long after
the Father having sent for his son under pretence of
some Business of great moment, he was there poysoned
by his Mother. By his death King Magnus being put
again into the possession of the whole Kingdom, studied
nothing but revenge against the Nobility. The better
to encompass his design, he made an under-hand Alliance
with the King of Denmark unto whom he surrendred
shonen again; who not only took possession of it,
but also by connivance of King Magnus fell into Gothland
and Oeland,
         1361. where he killed a great many Boors,
plundered the whole Country, and demolished Borgholm. 
The swedes being thus put to a nonplus submit themselves
to the protection of Haquin King of Denmark, who
made his Father Magnus a Prisoner in the Castle of Calmar. 
The senate of the Kingdom then perswaded
King Haquin to marry the Daughter of Henry Earl of
Holstein, which he seemingly consented to at that time. But
the Bride in her Voyage into sweden, having been driven
on the Coast of Denmark, was detained by Waldemar
King of Denamark, who intended to marry his Daughter
to King Haquin. Albert Duke of Me•klenburgh and
the Earls of Holstein did denounce War against the King
of Denmark if he did not release the Bride, but King
Waldemar had in the mean while so well managed the
Affairs with Haquin, that he resolved to marry Margaret
         
his Daughter. The Bride was then set at Liberty, but
being arrived in sweden was so slightly received by King
Magnus, who in the mean time had obtained his Liberty,
that she retired into a Nunnery; and those senators who
urged the King to perform his Marriage Contract, were
by Magnus banished the Kingdom,1363. who soon after married
his son to Margaret, that was then but eleven years
old. At this Wedding which was held at Copenhagen,
Waldemar caused the Parents of Haquin to be poysoned,
which worked so violently upon Blenha, that she died
immediately, but King Magnus was preserved by the
skill of his Physicians. § 8. Albert Duke of Mecklenburgh. Those swedish Lords that were banished by King
Magnus, having for some time lived in Gothland did at
last agree among themselves to elect Henry Earl of Holstein,
King of sweden. But he being a Man in years,
and not willing to entangle himself in those troublesome
Affairs, recommended to them Albert Duke of Mecklenburgh,
King Magnus's sisters son. The banished Lords
therefore having chosen his second son, whose name also
was Albert their King, carried him into Gothland, and
from thence to stockholm, which they easily took, being
assisted by a strong party within the City. Having then
called together such of the Nobility as they knew to be
Enemies to King Magnus, they proclaimed Albert King
in the City of stockholm. 
         1364. 
         Magnus and his son having
thereupon got together considerable Forces both in sweden
and Denmark, marched against King Albert into Ʋpland,
and were met him near by Encoping, where a bloody
Battle ensued, the Victory inclined to Albert's side,
King Magnus was taken Prisoner, Haquin wounded but
escaped the Hands of his Enemies. During the imprisonment
of King Magus,
         1365. 
         sweden was reduced to a most
miserable estate, by the Wars that were carried on betwixt
King Albert and Haquin and Waldemar, the two
last sending continual supplies into sweden to uphold
their Party, and Haquin was grown so strong, that he
defeated King Albert in a Battel and besieged stockholm. 
At last it was agreed that King Magnus should have his
Liberty,1371. paying a Ransom of 12000 Marks of sine silver,
and resign the Crown of sweden and shonen to

King Albert, which was performed accordingly, King
Magnus retiring into Norway, where he was drowned
by accident. King Haquin did not long survive his Father,
and his son Olaus dying very young, Queen Margaret
after his decease was sole Queen of Norway. By
the Death of this Olaus, the antient Race of the swedish
Kings was extinguished, which ever since the time of
st. Erick viz. for the space of 220 Years had ruled in
sweden. 
         1376. Not long after, Waldemar King of Denmark
died without leaving any Male Heirs behind him. In
whose stead the Danes to unite Norway with Denmark,
declared his Daughter Margaret their Queen. King
Albert by the Death of his Enemies being now established
in the Throne of sweden began to slight the swedish
Nobility, and to employ the Germans in his service,
who grew very Rich and Potent; and his Treasury being
exhausted by the war which was carried on against
Denmark he demanded from the states that part of the
Revenues of the Clergy, and some of the Lands which
belonged to the Nobility should be incorporated with
the Crown, which they refusing to consent to, he nevertheless
pursued his Intentions by open Violence. Whilest
therefore some that were no loosers by it and hoped to
partake of the Booty, sided with the King, the rest
were consulting how to deliver themselves from these
oppressions, and having renounced their obedience to
King Albert,
         Margaret. sought for Protection by Margaret Queen
of Denmark, which she granted them, upon condition
that if she should deliver them from King Albert, she
was to be Queen of sweden. Which the swedes being
forced to accept of, she was proclaimed Queen of
sweden. This proved the occasion of unspeakable miseries,
both Parties committing great Outrages in the
Country, which was quite exhausted before, by King
Albert who also at last was forced to pawn the Isle of
Gothland for 20000 Nobles to the Prussian Knights of
the Cross;12. sept. notwithstanding which being not able to
defray at length the Charges of the War,1388. he challenged
Queen Margaret to a Battel to be fought in the Plains
of Talkoping in West-Gothland. 
         The Battel of Tal•oping. 
          The appointed day being
come, a bloody Battel was fought in the beforementioned
Plain, where the Queen's Forces at last obtained

the Victory, King Albert and his son being taken
Prisoners. But this Victory rather encreased than diminished
the miseries under which the Kingdom had groaned
before, because the Dukes of Mocklenburgh; Earls of
Holstein and the Hanse Towns sided with King Albert's
Party, who sent constant supplies from Rostock and
Wismar by sea to stockholm, Calmar and other strongholds
in their possession, from whence the German Garrisons
made miserable havock all round the Country,
and the sea Coasts were extreamly infested by Privateers,
which had quite ruined the Trade of the Kingdom. 
This pernicious War having thus lasted seven
Years, a Treaty of Peace was set on foot at Helsingburgh,
which proving fruitless,1394. another meeting was appointed
at Aleholm,
         1395. where it was agreed that the King, his son,
and the rest of the Prisoners of note should be set at Liberty,
under condition that he within the space of three
Years, resign all his pretensions to the Kingdom unto
Queen Margaret, or else return to Prison; and that in
case of failure, the Cities of Lubeck, Hamburgh, Dantzick,
Thorn, Elbingen, saralsund, stetin and Campen
should oblige themselves to pay 60000 Marks of fine
silver to the Queen. Thus King Albert returned into
Mecklenburgh, after he had reigned 23 Years in sweden. 
He had notwithstanding this agreement not laid aside
his hope of recovering his Kingdom, for which he had
made great preparations, if his son had not died, two
Years after, when he at the appointed time resigned his
pretensions, and the places as yet in his possession to
the Queen, and at last ended his days in his native
Country of Mecklenburgh. Thus Margaret became
Queen over all the three Northern Kingdoms, which
she governed with extraordinary Wisdom, yet so that
the Danes were much better satisfied with her Government
than the swedes. 
        § 9. Erick Duke of Pomerania. Queen Margaret having restored Peace to the
Northren Kingdoms, her next care was to unite these
three Crowns for ever on one Head. For which purpose
she had sent for Henry a young Duke of Pomerania,
her sister's son, whose name to please the swedes, she

changed into that of Erick. 
         Union made at Calmar betwixt sweden, Denmark and Norway. 
          This Prince, tho' very
young, was in the second Year after the releasing of
King Albert, proclaimed King. In the Year next following,
the senators and Nobility of all the three Kingdoms
being assembled at Calmar,
         1396. where also the young
Erick was crowned, the Union of the three Kingdoms
was proposed, which at last was perfected and confirmed
by Oath and by the Hands and seals of the states
of the three Kingdoms; which might have tended to the
great Advantage of these three Nations, if the Danes
had not afterwards broke this Union, and endeavoured
to make themselves Masters of sweden, which proved
the occasion of bloody Wars betwixt these two Kingdoms. 
But because King Erick was but very young
Queen Margaret had the administration of Affairs during
his Minority, when the swedes and Norwegians soon
perceived that the Articles of this Union were likely to
be but ill observed, since the Queen preferred the Da•es
and other strangers much before them, and what Taxes
she levied in sweedland, were for the most part spent in
Denmark, where she generally resided. In the eighth
Year after King Erick was crowned, Queen Margates
attempted to re-gain the Isle of Gothland from the Prussian
Knights, without paying the Ransom; but having
not succeeded in her Enterpise, she redeemed it for 10000
Nobles. 1410. King Erick being by this time come to his
riper Years,1412. married Philippa the Daughter of Henry IV. 
King of England, and having after his Aunt's Death,
which happened not long after, taken upon him the sole
management of Affairs, he was intangled in a tedious
War with Henry Earl of Holstein, the Hanse Towns, and
the Dukes of Mecklenburgh and saxony, about the Dutchy
of sleswick, which at last cost him his three Kingdoms. 
For his subjects being over charged with Taxes,
which were employed towards the War, that could at
the best only prove beneficial to Denmark, and their
Commerce being interrupted with the Hanse Towns, it
occasioned great discontents among them; besides this,
the King's Officers had used the swedes very tyrannically,
and the King had upon several occasions receded
from the Articles of Union made at Calmar, especially

when he sent the most antient swedish Records into Denmark,
which at last obliged the swedes to take desperate
Counsels. The first Insurrection was made by the Dalekarls,
who being headed by a certain antient Nobleman
in those parts called Engelbrecht Engelbrechtson, besieged
one of the King's Officers called Josse Erichson, who had
exercised great Tyranny over them, in his Castle, neither
could they be appealed till he was deposed from
his Office, and another put in his place. But this Calm
did not last long, for the Boors being again stirred up by
Engelbrecht over-run all the neighbouring Country, destroying
with Fire and sword, all such as would not
side with them; and being joined by one Erick Pue••,
who headed the Northlanders, they took a great many
strongholds, killing all the Foreigners they met withal,
whose seats they destroyed, and at last forced the senate
of the Kingdom assembled at Wadstena, to renounce
their Allegiance to the King. These intestine Commotions
obliged King Erick to make Peace with the Holst•i••rs
and the Hanse Towns, and to turn all his Forces
against the swedes. But his Fleet being for a great
part destroyed by storms, he arrived with the rest at
stockholm, but not being able to cope with so great a
multitude, as Engelbrocht had raised against him; he
was fain to make a truce with them for twelve Months. 
In the mean while he retired into Denmark. leaving only
a Garrison of 600 Men in the Castle of stockholm. After
his departure Engelbrocht was declared Generalissi••
          over
all the Forces of the Kingdom, who, at last upon the
perswasion of the Archbishop Cluf, agreed to a Treaty
to be set on foot betwixt the King and his subjects,
where it was agreed that the swedes should again acknowledge
him for their King, provided he would
stand to the Union, which the King at that time consented
to, reserving only to his free disposal the three Castles
of stockholm, Calmar and Nycoping, all the rest being to
be committed to the Government of the Natives of
sweedland. Thus things seemed to be restored to the
antient state, but no sooner had the King got the aforesaid
Castles into his possession, but he began to recede,
and having left a Garrison of 500 Men in the Castle of
stockholm, retired upon a sudden into Denmark. King

         Erick having thus left the Kingdom a second time, the
swedish senators, who feared that he might soon return
with a greater Force, being assembled at Arboka, called
together the whole Nobility, and a Burger-Master out
of each City, to consult about the present exigency of
Affairs; but before they could come to any steady resolution,
Engelbrecht by the assistance of some of the
Citizens of stockholm, had made himself Master of that
City, and besieged the King's Lieutenant in the Castle. 
The Treaty being thus broke of, and the flame of Rebellion
rekindled,Charles Cnutson. the Marshal Charles Cnutson was declared
Governour and General of the Kingdom: This
was like to have occasioned great Disturbances, if Engelbrecht,
who pretended to be injured by this Choice,
had not been first appeased with great Promises, and
afterwards murthered by one Benedict suenson, with
whom he had an old quarrel. 1436. But Erick Pu•ke the
chief Companion of Engelbrecht taking up his Friend's
Quarrel against his Murtherers that were protected by
Charles Cnutson, it occasioned great Jealousies betwixt
them. The Castles of stockholm and Calmar being also
in the King's possession, and some of the Chiefest of the
Kingdom grown very jealous of the greatness of the
Marshal, the Treaty was renewed with the King at
Calmar, who came thither in Person, and promised to
put into all Offices and Places of Trust, Natives of
sweden, and having made Benedict suenson Governour of
the Castle of Calmar, appointed an Assembly of the senate
and Nobility to be held in september following
when he would be ready to surrender all the strongholds
into the hands of the Native subjects of sweden,
But in the mean time the King in his Voyage from
Gothland to suderkoping, was overtaken by a violent
Tempest, wherein most of his ships having been lost,
he narrowly escaped drowing. As soon as the swedes
got notice of this Misfortune, not knowing whether the
King was alive or dead, it was resolved that the last
Treaty made at Calmar should remain in Force. Pursuant
to this Decree, the Marshal having partly by great
Promises, partly by Threats, got into the possession of
all the Castles of the Kingdom, seemed to want nothing
to accomplish his Designs, but the Title of a King, where
         •t

         Erick Pueke being vexed to the soul, raised a great
number of Boors against him, who having defeated the
Marshal and his Forces, would quickly have put an
end to his Greatness, if he under pretence of reconciliation
had not invited Erick Pueke to an interview, and
notwithstanding his Faith given, sent him to stockholm,
where he was beheaded. In the mean while, the senators
of the Kingdom having got notice that the King was
alive,1437. appointed an Assembly to be held at Calmar,
where the King was to fulfil the former Treaty; but
the King not coming at the appointed time, Commissioners
were sent into Denmark to treat with him about
the performance of the Agreement made at Calmar,
which he refusing to do, they made an underhand
League with some of the great Men in Denmark against
King Erick. the effects of which he felt soon after. 
Whilest these things were transacting in Denmark, the
Marshal had by his cunning got the whole Power of the
Kingdom into his hands, and obtained from the senate
in sweden, to appoint a certain day for the King to appear
in sweden, and put an end to those Differences that
were then betwixt him and the Estates, and in case of a
refusal, they renounced their Allegiance to him. But
the Archbishop Oluf, and some of the Chief Men of the
Kingdom, that were dissatisfied at the Marshal's proceedings
did so far prevail by their Authority, that a
General Assembly of all the senators of the three Northern
Kingdoms should be held at Calmar, which in
all likelihood might have had better success than before,
if the Archbishop had not been poysoned in his Journey
thither by the Marshal. Notwithstanding this, the rest
of the senators appeared at Calmar, but the King's Commissioners
refusing to acknowledge and to confirm the
Treaty made at Calmar, which the swedes insisted upon,
the whole meeting proved fruitless. In the mean
time King Erick was retired with all his Treasure
out of Denmark into Gothland, and the Danish senators
who as well as the swedes had been dissatisfied with the
King for a considerable time before, agreed with the
swedes to renounce their Allegiance to him, and to
choose one in his stead, that would maintain the Union
betwixt these Kingdoms. The Danes therefore sent

to Christopher Duke of Bavaria,
         Christopher Duke of Bavaria. who being King Erick's
sister's son, had for some time lived in Denmark, desiring
him to accept of that Crown. 1439. As soon as he arrived
in Denmark, Ambassadors were sent to the Marshal
and the other senators of sweden, that were then at
Calmar, to notifie the arrival of the Duke of Bavaria,
and to treat with them to receive him also for their
King, as the only means to maintain the Union and
Peace betwixt those Kingdoms. The Marshal and his
Party were not a little surprised at this Proposition; but
perceiving that, at the Dyet held at Arboga, most of the
Estates were inclined to maintain the Union, and receive
Christopher for their King, they also agreed with
the rest of the Estates, and Christopher was received by
the Marshal and the senators with great Pomp at Calmar,
from whence being conducted to stockholm, and
from thence to Ʋpsal, he was there crowned King of
sweden, and soon after returned into Denmark. After
he had reigned four years, he married Dorothee the
Daughter of John Marquis of Brandenburgh; and King
Erick, who was yet in the possession of Gothland, doing
considerable damage to the swedish ships, he was prevailed
upon by the senate to undertake an Expedition
into Gothland. Whilst every body was in great expectation
about the success of this Enterprise, he upon the
sudden clapt up a Peace with King Erick, leaving him
in the quiet possession of Gothland. 
         1448. He died at Helsinburgh,
in his Journey to Joncoping, whither he had called
together the senate and Nobility of sweden, having
left great Legacies to several Churches in sweden; but
the Danes, who had all his ships, Ammunition, rich
Furniture and ready Money in their hands, would not
pay one groat of it. After the death of K. Christopher,
         Charles Cnutson. the Estates of sweden
that were assembled at stockholm were divided into two
parties, some of them being for deferring the Election of a
new King, till such time as the senators of the 3 kingdoms
could, at a general Assembly chuse a King, according to
the Union agreed upon betwixt them; but the Marshal
and his Party, which was the strongest, were, without
having any respect to the Union, for chusing immediately
a King of their own: this Contest lasted for several

days, and that with such heats that they were
ready to come to blows, till at last the Marshal Charles
Cnutson's Party prevailed, who was chosen King of sweden. 
But the Danes offered the Crown of Denmark to
Adolf Duke of Holstein, and he by reason of his old Age,
having refused to accept of it, they made Christian Earl
of Oldenburg, the Duke's sister's son, their King. 
Charles, at the very beginning of his Reign, besieged
King Erick in the Castle of Wisby, who having deluded
the swedish Generals with a Truce, did, in the mean
while provide himself with all Necessaries, and was at
last relieved by Christian King of Denmark; who sent
him into Pomerania, where, in the City of Rugen, he
ended his days, without making any further pretension
to the Crown. In the mean while the Norwegians, except some of
the Nobility, had made Charles also their King, which
occasioned almost a continual War betwixt him and
Christian king of Denmark, in which King Charles was
pretty successful at first; but after the death of the
brave Thord Bonde, his General, who was barbarously
murthered; King Christian, with the Assistance of the
Archbishop of sweden and several others of the swedish
Nobility, who were Enemies to King Charles, proved
too hard for him: for the Archbishop having surprised
the King's Forces at strengness, besieged him in the City
of stockholm; so that King Charles finding himself reduced
to the utmost Extremity, resolved to embarque
with all his Treasure for Dantzick, where he arrived
safely, after a Voyage of three days, in the tenth year
of his Reign. Christian I. 
          No sooner had King Charles left the
Kingdom,1458. but the Archbishop, having got all the stronholds
of the Kingdom into his hands, sent to Christian
King of Denmark, to invite him into sweden, who being
arrived with a considerable Fleet at stockholm, was,
by the senate and Nobility declared King of sweden, and
crowned at Ʋpsal. He reigned at first with a general
satisfaction of the swedes; but some years after, by his
Cruelty and heavy Impositions laid upon the People, became
odious to them: for he not only caused some of
the Great men, that were falsly accused of holding a
Correspondency with King Charles, to be tortured to

death, but also exercised great Cruelty against a great
number of Boors, that were risen in Arms against him;
and having conceived a jealousie of the Archbishop, he
caused him to be carried Prisoner to Copenhagen. This
so exasperated Katil the Bishop of Lyncoping that he
raised an Insurrection against the King, and forced
him to retire into Denmark: and tho the King returned
the year next following with a considerable Army, yet
being defeated by the Bishop's Forces, he was forced to
leave the Kingdom a second time;1464. and the Bishop having
laid siege to the City and Castle of stockholm, where
King Christian had left a Garrison, sent for assistance to
King Charles, who being glad of this Opportunity, came
with some Forces (which he had gathered in Poland
and Prussia) into sweden, where he was no sooner arrived,
but the City of stockholm was surrendred to him,
and he again received as King of sweden. But this Joy
was of no long continuance; for a difference being arisen
betwixt him and Bishop Katil, about the exchanging
the Archbishop that was Prisoner at Copenhagen,
the said Bishop did underhand agree with King Christian
to restore him to the Kingdom of sweden, under condition
that he should set the Archbishop at liberty. According
to this agreement, a Reconciliation being made
betwixt K Christian and the Archbishop; the latter was
received very splendidly by the Bishop, and was no sooner
arrived in sweden, but having raised some Forces against
King Charles, defeated him in a bloody Battel fought upon
the Ice near stockholm, and forced him to abjure his
Right and Pretension to the Kingdom. After the King's
Resignation, the Archbishop made himself Master of all
the strong-holds of the Kingdom, without any opposition,
except that one Nils sture, a particular Friend of
K. Charles's, traversed sometimes his Designs. This Nils
sture and one Erick Axelson, Governour of Wibourg in Finland,
having at last made a party against him, plaied their
Game so well that Erick Axelson,
         Erick Axelson, who had married King
Charles's Daughter was declared Regent of the Kingdom. 1466. 
But the A. Bish. was obliged to surrender stockholm and
some other strong holds into the Regent's hands. Nevertheless
the hatred betwixt the two exasperated Factions,
headed by Nils sture and Erick Nilson (of which

party was also the Archbishop) continued with great animosity. 
Erick Nilson and his Party, under pretence of
protecting the Archbishop against the Power of King
Charles and his adherents, endeavoured the Restauration
of King Christian, but Nils sture and his Party openly declared,
that they would either have King Charles restored,
or at least maintain the Regent in his station. These two
Parties did not only commit great Insolencies and Murthers,
making great havock all over the Country, but
at last also came to an open War, wherein the Archbishop's
Party being worsted, he died for grief; and the
Common People in hopes to put an end to the miseries
of the Kingdom once more restored Charles to the
Crown. But Erick Nilson, Erick Carlson, T•olle and some others
having again raised some Forces against him,1468. and
surprised his Army during the time of the Truce, again
forced him to seek for shelter in the Dalers, whither being
pursued by Erick Carlson, he with an unequal number
gave him a signal overthrow, forcing him to retire into
Denmark King Charles being soon after returned to stockholm,
(which City and the whole Kingdom he recommended
before his death to steen scure his sister's son) he
there died in the same year, leaving the Kingdom in such
a confusion,1470. that for a twelve month after, there was
a meer Anarchy in sweden, some having declared for
King Christian, some for steen sture to be made Regent
of the Kingdom. At last the Government was committed
to steen sture, who having vanquished King Christian
in a memorable Battel fought near stockholm,
         1471. and forced
him to retire with his broken Forces by sea into Denmark▪
         
got into the possession of the whole Kingdom of
sweden. And tho' King Christian kept the Regent of
sweden in a continual alarm as long as he lived, and several
meetings were held concerning his Restauration,
yet there was no open War betwixt the two Kingdoms,
and steen sture reigned for a considerable time with a
general applause; so that King Christian during his Regency,
never durst return into sweden, but died in Denmark
in the year 1481. After the Death of King Christian,
         1481. the Danes and Norwegians
having made John the son of Christian their

King, the swedes also agreed with King John upon certain
Articles, which the King having confirmed to them
under his seal, he was declared King of sweden. But
the Regent steen sture, notwithstanding this solemn
Transaction remained in the possession of the Kingdom
for fourteen Years after, under pretence that the Danes
had not fulfilled their Promise according to the Articles
of the Treaty, during which time the Kingdom was
miserably afflicted by intestine Divisions, and the
Wars which were carried on against Denmark and Russia. 
The senators therefore of sweden having in vain
endeavoured to perswade steen sture to lay down his
Office, at last deposed him from the Regency, and craved
Assistance from King John,
         John II. 
          who having defeated
steen sture and his Party near stockholm, was by the
senate and the Regent himself received as King of sweden
and his son Christian declared his successor after
his death in that Kingdom. 1497. This King reigned very
peaceably for a while, but after some Years by the perswasions
of some Courtiers, fell into the same Errour
which had been the undoing of his Predecessors: For
under pretence that the Revenues of the Crown were
extreamly diminished, he obliged steen sture and several
others to surrender the Fiefs belonging to the Crown,
which they were in possession of, some of which he bestowed
upon the Danes and Germans. Besides this, his
Governours had committed great Insolencies in their
Provinces, which so exasperated the People, that as soon
as the News of his defeat in Ditmarsen was spread over
sweden, the swedes being headed by steen sture, assembled
at Wadstana, where having renounced their Allegiance,
they bid open defiance to him, alledging that he,
had not fulfilled the Articles of the Treaty made at
Calmar. 
        The King being surprised at this unexspected News
sailed forthwith for Denmark, leaving the Queen with
a good Carrison at stockholm, which City was thereupon
besieged by sture; who being soon after again
constituted Regent of the Kingdom, forced the Castle
of stockholm to a surrender, and got almost all the rest of
the strongholds in sweden into his possession; notwithstanding
which, the Danes burnt Elfsburgh and Oresteen,
         
and committed great Cruelties in West-Gothland, under
the Conduct of Christian King John's son, who had
done the like not long before in Norway, where he had
rooted out almost all the Noble Families. Yet because the
Queen was as yet in sweden, the fury of the Danes was
for a while appeased by the intercession of the Lubeckers
and the Cardinal Raimow, who having procured Liberty
for her to return into Denmark, she was conducted
by the Regent to the Frontiers of swaland. But in his
return to Ioncoping, he died suddenly, and his death having
been kept secret for a while, there was a strong
suspition that he had been poysoned by Mereta the Widow
of Cnut Alfson, thereby to open the way to her
Bridegroom suante sture, to the Regency of the Kingdom. 
As soon as the news of the Regent's death was
spread all over the Kingdom,1503. the Estates convened at
stockholm, where it was disputed for some time, whether
King John should be recalled, or suante Nilson sture
should be made Regent, till the latter having prevailed,
the said sture was made Regent of the Kingdom. 1504. Then
the War was renewed with King John, which was carried
on with various success, both Parties committing
great devastations, without any other remarkable advantage. 
The Danes having at first stirred up the Emperour,
the Pope and the Russians against the swedes,
did considerable mischief, but the Regent having made a
Peace with the Russians, and set the Lubeckers against
Denmark▪
          retook Calmar and Bornholm, and would in
all likelihood have made greater Progresses, if he had
not soon after died at Westekaos, in the eighth year of
his Regency. After the death of this Regent, there
were again great Divisions in the senate about the Election
of a new Regent;1511. the younger sort were for
choosing steen sture the deceased Regent's son:steen sture the younger. 
          But
the Archbishop and Bishops, and the rest of the antient
senators, would have elected Gustavus Trolle an antient
Wise and experienced Man. After several prorogations
and very hot debates,1512. at last steen sture, who was favoured
by the common People, and had most of the
strongholds of the Kingdom in his hands, was declared
Regent, and King John died in the year next following
at Ablburgh in Jutland. 
         1513. After his death, the Danes
         
and Norwegians had declared Christian his son their
King but the swedes who had not forgot his cruelties
formerly committed in West-Gothland desired time to
consider of a thing of such importance. King Christian
finding himself after four years tergiversation deceived
in his hopes, and that the Regent would not part with
his Power by fair means, did not only stir the Pope Leo X. 
up against him, but also brought Gustavus Trolle the new
Arbhbishop by great Presents over to his side, and perswaded
the Russians to make an in-road into Finland. 
steen sture being soon convinced of the Archbishop's sinister
Intentions, had tendered the Oath to him, which
he refusing to take, was besreged by the Regent in his
Castle of stecka. Then it was that the Archbishop called
King Christian to his Assistance, who having taken
some ships loaden with Amunition belonging to the Regent,
and in vain endeavoured to relieve the besieged
Castle, the War was begun on both sides. For the Archbishop
having been forced to surrender the Castle and
his Office, Pope Leo thereupon excommunicated the Regent,
laying a Fine of 100000 Ducats upon the swedes,
and enjoyning the execution thereof to King Christian. 
Pursuant to this Decree, the King of Denmark fell with
a great Army into sweden, and was met by the Regent
and his Forces in West-Gothland, but the Regent having
received a Wound there, of which he died soon after at
strengness, his Army first retreated, and being deprived
of a Leader, afterwards dispersed. King Christian then
having divided his Army, sent one part into West and
East-Gothland, which were soon subdued, and marched
with the rest to strengness. 
         1520. 
        The Archbishop taking hold of this opportunity, reassumed
his Archi-Episcopal Dignity, and being assisted
by two other Bishops and seven of the senators of the
Kingdom did declare Christian King of sweden in the
name of the Estates at Ʋpsal. The King having been
Crowned by the Archbishop Trolle, and received the
City of stockh•lm by surrender into his hands, treated
the swedes at 〈◊〉 with abundance of humanity, but soon
after, found out a Weapon wherewith to destroy his
Adversaries, and this was the business concerning the degradation
of the Archbishop and the ruining of his Castle

of stecka. For tho' the King by an Amnestie had pardoned
all past Offences, yet no satisfaction having been
given to the Pope, the Archbishop in his Name, demanded
a million pounds of silver in reparation of the damages
done to the Church at Ʋpsal, and his Castle of
stecka. And to make up the matter, it was pretended
that Gunpowder had been conveyed into the King's Palace
to blow him up. steen sture's Widow, his Mother
in Law, fifteen others besides the senare and Commonalty
of stockholm, were accused as Actors and Abettors,
who were all condemned as Hereticks, ninety four of
them, all People of Note, being beheaded at stockholm
and their servants hanged up with Boots and spurs. 
The deceased Regent's body having been digged up, was
exposed among the rest of the executed Persons, and
the Quarters set up and down the Country. His Widow
and Mother in Law were forced to purchase their
Lives with the loss of their whole Estate, and were nevertheless
with a great many other Women of Quality
committed to Prison. In Finland, Hemoning Gudde, notwithstanding
his former services done to him, was with
ten more executed by the King's Command, the Abbot
of the Convent at Nydala was with eleven Monks
drowned by his Orders, and two Gentlemen's sons, one
of nine, the other of seven years, beheaded at Joncoping,
and after he had in this manner murthered 600 of his
swedish subjects he returned into Denmark
        § 9. But in the mean while that King Christian was
busied in bringing the swedes under the Danish yoke,
by all manner of inhumane Barbarities,Gustavus I. 
          
         Gustavus
Erichson (whose Father had been beheaded by the Tyrant,
and his Mother thrown in Prison) had sheltered
himself among the Dalek•rls, who being made sensible of
the danger which threatened them and the whole Kingdom,
had made Gustave their Head, whose example
being followed by the Estates of sweden, they soon after
declared him Regent of that Kingdom, except the Archbishop
and his Party, that remained firm to the Danish
Interest. King Christian being violently exasperated at
Gustave, revenged himself upon his Mother and two sisters,
whom he sent from stokholm to Copenhagen, where

they perished in Prison; he issued also out an Order,
that no quarter should be given to any swedish Nobleman,
and committed great Barbarities wherever he
came. The swedes on the other hand, under the Conduct
of their Regent Gustave, repaid the Danes with the same
Coin wherever they met them, and with the Assistance
of the Lubeckers besieged stockholm, which was as yet in
King Christian's Possession, when they received the joyful
news out of Denmark, that the Jutlanders had renounced
their Allegiance to King Christian. 
         1523. This so
encouraged Gustave and his Party, that they did not
only drive King Christian's Forces out of most Provinces
of the Kingdom, retook Ocland and Borkholm, but also
recovered the Castle and City of Calmar, and made Gustave
King of sweden, who thereupon immediately summoned
stockholm to a surrender, and the Garrison being
without hopes of relief, surrendred the City and Castle
to the Lubeckers, who restored the same to King Gustave. 
In the mean while King Christian was retired with his
Queen into the Netherlands, and the Jutlanders having
made Frederick I. King Christian's Uncle, their King,
would fain have perswaded the swedes to follow their
example, but these being not ambitious of continuing
the Union with Denmark, had refused their proffer, and
chosen Gustave their King. But King Gustave finding
the Treasury mightily exhausted by these long intestine
Wars, he not only taxed the Clergy to pay considerable
sums towards the payment of his souldiers, but also
made bold with the superfluous Ornaments of the
Churches, against which, Brask the Bishop of Lincoping
having protested and made complaint thereof to Johannes
Magnus the Pope's Legate, Peter Bishop of Westeraas
endeavoured to raise an Insurrection among the Dalekerls. 
        But whilest these Bishops were employed in maintaining
their Privileges, the Protestant Religion had
begun to spread all over the Kingdom. The same was
by some Merchants and German souldiers first introduced
into sweden, and some swedish students, that had
studied at Wittenbergh, had brought along with them
into their Native Country, both the Doctrine and
Writings of Luther. Among these one Olaus Petri was

the chiefest, who having been an Auditor of Luther, at his
return into sweden was made a Canon and Protonotary
to the Bishops of strenguess: this Man after the death of
the Bishop, having brought Lars Anderson the Archdeacon
over to his Opinion, began not only to defend
Luther's Doctrine publickly in the schools, but also
to publish the same from the Pulpit. The Bishop
being absent, Dr. Nils Dean of that Chapter, with all
his might opposed this new Doctrine, which being come
to the King's Ears, he advised with Lars Anderson, who
having instructed him in the chief Points of it,Reformation begun in sweden. 
          and in
what manner a great many German Princes had taken
away the superfluous riches of the Clergy, began to
hearken to his Opinion, resolving nevertheless to go on
cautiously in this business, and to see how some Princes
in Germany should proceed in this Affair, as also how
the Bishops in sweden would relish this Doctrine. In
the mean while Pope Hadrian IV. had sent his Legate
into sweden to endeavour the extirpation of this Heresie,
and the Clergy of sweden grew every day more
refractory, refusing to pay the Taxes imposed upon
them, as being contrary to their Privileges. On the
other hand, Olaus Petri being encouraged by the King,
was not silent, but defended his Cause both by Dispute
and Writing, with such success, that the King not only
constituted him Minister in the great Church of stockholm,
and put into other vacant Church-Benefices, such
Ministers as had studied at Wittenbergh, but also constituted
over the Dominicans and Black Fryars, such Priors
as he knew to be faithful to him, and such of them
as were Foreigners he banished the Kingdom, and told
unfeignedly to Bishop Brask▪
          that he could not deny Protection
to the Lutherans, as long as they were not convinced
of any Crime or Errour. But all this while one soren Norby, who still adhered
to King Christian, had Gothland in his Possession, and
did considerable damage to the swedes in their Trade;
against him King Gustavus having sent Bernhard van
Melan with some Forces to reduce the said Island, and
Norby finding himself too weak put himself and the
Island under the Protection of Denmark, which occasiaoned
some differences between these two Northern Kings▪
         
who had been very good Friends ever before. About
this time Olaus Petri was publickly married in the great
Church at stockholm, and the King had not only demanded
the Tenths of the Clergy towards the maintenance
of his Forces, but also Quartered some of his
Horse in the Monasteries, which so incensed Bishop
Brask, that he forbid in his whole Diocess so much as
to name the Doctrine of Luther. But the King having
understood that Olaus Petri was busie in Translating the
New Testament into the swedish Tongue,First Translation of the New Testament into swedish. 
          commanded
the Archbishop, to take care that the Roman Catholicks
also should make a Translation, which though it •elished
very ill with the Bishops, yet were they fain to comply
with the King's command, who, to mortifie them the
more, also ordered a Disputation to be held at Ʋpsal betwixt
Dr. Pieter Galle and Olaus Petri, concerning the
chiefest Points in question betwixt the Roman Catholicks
and Lutherans, where Olaus Petri had much the
better, and his Translation was approved of before the
others, which had been patched up by so many Translators. 
In the mean time the Danish Clergy had given
a considerable subsidy to their King to be employed
against King Christian, wherefore King Gustave, taking
hold of this opportunity, demanded a considerable supply
from the swedish Clergy, but these objecting that it
was against their Privileges and Rights, the King ordered
the same to be examined in another Dispute betwixt
Olaus Petri, and Dr. Pieter Galle, and because
they were not able to prove their Title out of the Holy
scripture, the King concluded them to be dependent on
his pleasure, and at the Dyet held at Westeraos not only
demanded a supply from the Clergy, but also proposed
that the superfluous Bells should be taken out of the
Churches, and be employed towards the payment of
the Debt due to the Lubeckers. And because the Archbishop
grew more troublesome every day, the King first
took him into Custody, and afterwards sent him Ambassadour
into Poland, from whence he never returned into
sweden. He also commanded another Disputation to
be held concerning the chief Points in question betwixt
the Lutherans and Roman Catholicks, which however
met with great opposition from Bishop Brask, and the

rest of the Roman Catholick Clergy, who set up a Country
Fellow, against Gustave. This Fellow pretended to
be the son of steen sture (notwithstanding he was dead
a twelve month before) and having got a party among
the Dalekerls, and being upheld by Bishop Brask and
the Bishop of Druntheim in Norway,
         1527. and encouraged in
his undertaking by King Frederick of Denmark, laid
open claim to the Crown, threatning all the Lutherans
and especially the City of stockholm with Fire and
sword, which was the most forward in settling the
Protestant Religion. About the same time the Emperour had besieged
Pope Clement VII. in the Castle of st. Angelo, wherefore
King Gustave taking hold of this Juncture, appointed
a Dyet to be held at Westeraos, where in his
Declaration he professed; that the Roman Catholick
Clergy had made it their business to charge him with
making Innovation in Religion for no other reason, but
that he would not let them domineer over the Laymen,
and had forced them to submit to the Civil Power, and
to give part of their superfluous Riches, some of which
they had got by fraud, towards easing the Common People
of those burthensome Taxes (which he hitherto had been
forced to impose upon them. ) And that for the same Reason
the Emperour himself had been forced lately to teach
the Pope his duty. The same thing was proposed by the
King to the whole Dyet, where he told them; that the
superfluous Revenues of the Clergy ought to be annexed
to the Crown, and especially such Lands as since
the year 1454 had been given to the Clergy, should
be restored to the right Heirs, promising withal that
the Common People should be for the future eased of
their Taxes; in case they would give their consent to
the reduction of the Revenues of the Clergy. And the
better to get the consent of the Temporal Lords and
senators he made a great Banquet, where he gave the
next place to himself to these senators, whereas the same
had belonged formerly to the Bishops, who now were
forced to be contented with the next place after them,
the third place was given to the rest of the Nobility,
the fourth to the inferiour Clergy, the fifth to the Citizens,
the sixth to the Boors; which so exasperated the

Clergy that they assembled in the Church of st. Egidius,
and secretly took a resolution among themselves not to
obey the King in this Point, not to surrender any of
their Revenues, or to recede from their antient Religion. 
And Bishop Brask freely told the King, that the
Clergy of the Kingdom had such a strict dependency on
the Pope, that without his consent they could not do any
thing whatsoever. Which as it met with great approbation
from all the rest of the Clergy, and from some
of the Temporal Estates, so the King was so incensed
thereat, that he immediately rose from his seat, and
told the Estates that he was ready to Abdicate the Kingdom,
if they would repay him his Charges and Monies
which he had laid out for that use, and to show them
that he was in earnest, retired for several days with some
of his chief Officers into the Castle. The Estates being
much surprised at the King's resolution, especially
when they saw the Citizens of stockholm to be stedfast
to the King, and that Dr. Peter Galle was worsted by
Olaus Petri in a late Disputation, thought it their best
way to beg the King's pardon and to intreat him not to
resign the Crown. Upon their reiterated request the
King having been at last prevailed upon to come out of
the Castle, demanded from several Bishops to surrender
into his hands their Castles, and to subscribe a Decree
made at this Dyet, concerning the regulating of
the Clergy, which they were fain to comply withal. As
soon as the Dyet was ended he took not only from the
Monasteries such Lands as had been given to them
since the year 1454. Church Lands reduced in sweden. 
          but also several other Church Lands
and precious moveables, all which he annexed to the
Crown. In the mean while the Bishops and their party
were not idle, but were contriving all manner of
mischief against the King, though with small success. 
For the Dalekerls, who had made an Insurrection, were
frightened by the King to comply with his commands,
and to send away their Leader, the supposititious s•ure;
and sigismund King of Poland, unto whom the dissatisfied
party had proffered the Crown, did not think fit
to accept of it; so that Bishop Brask, despairing at last
of the Roman Catholick Cause, under pretence of a
Journey retired to Dantzick. 
        
The King having surmounted all these difficulties,
thought convenient not to defer any longer his Coronation,1528. 
which having been solemnized at Ʋpsal with the
usual solemnity: he summoned the Rebellious Dalekerls
to appear before him at Thuana, threatning them
with Fire and sword if they did not appear at the appointed
time; The Rebels being throughly frightened
by the King's severity appeared without Arms at the appointed
place, where he caused several of the Ringleaders
to be Executed, and dismissed the rest, after having
promised to be obedient for the future. In Helsingland
he appeased the tumultuous multitude with threats,
and fined their Leaders, and having called together a
synod of the Clergy at Orebro, where the King's Chancellour
was President, the chiefest Points of the Popish
Doctrine were there abolished, and in their stead the
Protestant Religion introduced, where it was also ordered,
that a Protestant Professor of Divinity should be
Constituted in each Cathedral. This wrought in a manner
Miracles among the Inferiour Clergy and Monks,The Protestant Religion Established in sweden. 
         
who left their Monasteries, were married, and became
Ministers in the Protestant Churches. But the Bishops
and their party entred into an Association with some of
the dissatisfied Lords in West Gothland, who accused the
King of Heresie and other Crimes, renouncing their Allegiance
to him. These were Headed by Thuro Johanson
the Rix Marshal, who raised an Insurrection among
the Dalekerls, and endeavoured also to stir up the West
and East Gothes, whom he persuaded to make Magnus
Brynteson, a Man in great Authority among them, their
King. But the King having again appeased this tumult
by granting his Pardon to them, Magnus the Bishop of
skara and Thuro Johnson fled into Denmark, but Magnus
Bayteson, Nils Olofson and Thuro Erickson having been
Convicted of High Treason at the Dyet held at str•ngness,
the two first were Executed, and the third paid a
considerable Fine. The King then, to settle the minds
of his subjects having renewed his Pardon, caused the
superfluous Bells to be taken out of the steeples, the
same being granted to him by the Estates towards the
payment of a Debt due to the Lubeckers. Which
proved a new subject for an Insurrection; for the Dalekerls
         
not only seised upon some of these Bells, but also
pretended to hold an Assembly at Arboga, to consult about
the Deposing of King Gustave, which obliged the
King to call together the Estates at Ʋpsal, whither he
came in person with a good Army, and meeting with
great opposition from the mutinous People, ordered his
soldiers to fire among them, which so terrified them
that upon their Knees they begged his Pardon, promising
to be more Obedient for the future. Things
being thus pretty well settled the King married Catharine
the Daughter of Magnus Duke of saxen Lauenburgh,
and having received intelligence that King Christian
was landed in Norway with a considerable Force,
he sent some Troops under the Command of Lars sigeson
the Rix Marshal to the Frontiers of Norway, who
having been joined by some Danes, forced King Christian
to raise the siege of Banus,
         1533. who at last surrendring
himself to the Danes, was by Frederick King of Denmark,
committed to Prison, where he died after twenty
seven years imprisonment. But no sooner was this storm
over, but the Lubeckers raised another against sweden. 
For, they having demanded from the King, to grant
them the whole Trade on his Northern sea Coasts,
which he refused to consent to, peremptorily demanded
their Debt, and having joyned with a great many Refugies
of King Christian's party, and made John Earl
of Hoya, who had married King Gustave's sister, their
Head, did propose to themselves no less than the Conquest
of the Northern Kingdoms, having inticed some
Citizens of stockholm under pretext of making that City
a free Hanse Town, to lay violent hands on the King:
And after the death of Frederick King of Denmark,
when that Kingdom was divided into several Factions
persuaded the senate of Copenhagen and Malmoe to enter
into the Confederacy of the Hanse Towns. Being
thus strengthened by a considerable party within that
Kingdom they had great success against the Danes, till
these having declared Christian III. their King, and
being assisted with Mony, ships, and Forces by King
Gustave beat the Lubeckers near He•sinburgh, and afterwards
in a sea-Fight defeated their whole Fleet, and
carried a great many of their ships into Denmark, soon

after King Gustave to strengthen himself the better at
Home, married Margaret the Daughter of Abraham
Erickson, Governor of West Gothland, which Alliance
stood afterwards his son Duke John in great stead against
King Erick. King Gustave having also conceived
a jealousie against the Emperour Charles V. whom he
suspected to be for making Palls Grave Frederick, son
in Law of the imprisoned King Christian, King over
the Northern Kingdoms, took a resolution to strengthen
himself with the Alliance of France. To put this design
in execution he sent his secretary into France, who
having first made a Treaty of Commerce betwixt these
two Crowns, did also afterwards conclude a defensive
Alliance betwixt them. Gustave having thus settled his Affairs called a Dyet
to be held at Westeraas,
         1542. where the Estates of the Kingdom
declared the succession Hereditary for the future,1544. 
Constituting Erick Gustaveson,
         The Kingdom of sweden made Hereditary, and the Popish Religion abolished. who was then but eleven
years old, his Father's successor. At the same Dyet the
Popish Religion was quite abolished, and the Lutheran
Religion Established in sweden, the King and the Estates
having obliged themselves by a solemn Oath to
maintain the same with all their power. In the year
1551. King Gustave, after the death of his Queen
Margaret, married Catharine the Daughter of Gustave
Olufson, and ruled the Kingdom of sweden with great
Tranquility, except that the Russians had faln into Livonia
and Finland, with whom having made a Peace,
and being now grown very old he by his Testament
gave to John his second son the Dukedom of Finland,
to the third son Magnus the Dukedom of East Gothland,
and to Charles,
         1556. the youngest of all, the Dukedom of
sudermanland, Nericke and Wermeland, which Countries
they were to hold in Fief from the Crown. But
his eldest son Erick, who was •o succeed him in the
Kingdom, having been persuaded by his Tutor, Dionysius
Burraeus a Frenchman to make his Addresses to
Elizabeth Queen of England, thereby to strengthen his
Interest against his Brothers, sent the said Dionysius into
England, who having writ to his Master that nothing
was wanting to make up the Match but his presence,
the Prince would have gone forthwith into England, if

his Father had not opposed it, who sent in his stead his
second son John, and steen sture. These being very
civilly entertained by Queen Elizabeth, at their return
Home told the Prince that they believed nothing to be
wanting to compleat the Marriage but his presence,
which was very joyfully received by the Prince. But
the old and wise King, who soon perceived, that they
had mistaken Complements for Realities, thought it
advisable to Communicate the business with the Estates
Assembled at stockholm, who after having confirmed
the former Hereditary Union and the King's Testament,
at last gave their consent to this Marriage, granting
a considerable supply towards the defraying of the
charges of this Marriage. But whilst the Prince was
preparing for his Voyage, part of his Baggage having
been sent before, he being near ready to follow in person,
King Gustave dyed at stockholm,
         1559. and King Erick,
not thinking it advisable to trust his Brother with the
Kingdom, was forced to put by his Journey into
England. 
        § 10. Eri•k XIV. 
          King Erick was twenty seven years of age
when he succeeded his Father in the Kingdom. His
first business was to prescribe certain new Articles to
his Brothers, thereby to maintain the Royal Authority
against them, which though sorely against their
will, they were forced to subscribe at the Dyet held
at Arboga. 
         1561. At his Coronation he first introduced the
Titles of Earls and Barons into sweden,
         The Titles of Earls and Barons introduced. alledging that
in an Hereditary Kingdom there ought to be also Hereditary
Dignities among the Nobility. At his very
first Accession to the Crown he was engaged in the
Troubles, which then sorely afflicted the Li•landers. 
For some of them having put themselves under the Protection
of Denmark, some under the Crown of Poland,
those of Reval and the Nobility of Esthenland, that
were nearest to sweden, sought for Protection to King
Erick Whereupon the King having sent an Army under
the Command of Claes Horn (who was joyfully received
at Reval) took them into his Protection, and confirmed
to the City and Nobility their former Privileges. 
As soon as the Poles heard of the arrival of the swedish
         
Army at Reval, they sent an Ambassadour to demand
Reval from the swedes, who having received no other
answer, but that the swedes had at least as good a
Title to Reval, as the Poles, returned Home again, and
the swedish Garrison that was besieged by the •olish
Forces in Reval, forced them to quit that Enterprise. 
soon after, the King being fully resolved to pursue his
intentions concerning the Marriage with Queen Elizabeth
of England, Embarked at Elshorgth to go thither in
person, but was by a violent Tempest forced to return. 
As he was very inconstant in his Temper, and very superstitious,
being much addicted to Astrology, so after
this misfortune he laid aside the thoughts of this Marriage
for a while, making his Addresses by his Ambassadours,
and with great Presents, to Mary Queen scotland, and
the Princess of Lorain both at one time, and not long
after to Katharine the Daughter of the Landgrave of
Hessen, but succeeded in neither. In the mean while
his Borther John had married Katharine Daughter of
sigismund King of Poland, which having been done
without Ring Erick's good liking, who was both mistrustful
of the Poles and his Brother, put him into such
a rage, that he besieged his Brother in the Castle of
Aboa, which having been taken by strategem, he caused
him to be sentenced to death, which sentence he however
changed into a perpetual Imprisonment for that time,
but seemed to repent of it afterwards, when the Russians
demanded the said Katharine, his Brother's Wife▪
in Marriage for their Great Duke. The Poles to revenge
this Affront, stirred up the Danes and Lubeckers against
the swedes, and the Danes having affronted the swedish
Ambassadours at Copenhagen, preparations were made on
all sides, which soon broke out into a War, wherein
the swedes routed the Danes and Lubeckers in several
sea Engagements, but also lost their Admiral (which
ship carried two hundred Brass Guns) and by Land
there was great havock made on both sides, with almost
equal Fortune, except that the swedes had pretty
good success in Livonia. But whilst King Erick was
engaged in War with all his Neighbours round about
him, the inward discontents began to increase more and
more among his subjects by the ill management which

he had shown both in his Affairs and Amours, being
surrounded with a seraglio of Mistrisses, (among whom
one Katharine, an ordinary Country Wench had the
greatest sway over him, whom he also married afterwards,
whereby he lost his Authority among the Nobility. )
Besides this, he was guided in most concerns of
moment by one Joran •erson his Favourite, and his
former Tutor Dionysius Beuraeus, who fomented a continual
jealousie betwixt him and the Family of the
stures, which at last broke out into a fatal revenge. For
there having been Witnesses suborned against suarte
sture and his son Erick, they were with several others of
that Family not only committed to Prison, and miserably
murthered there by the King's command, but he also
with his own hands stabed Nils sture, and repenting soon
after of so barbarous a Fact caused his former Tutor
Dionysius, who advised it, to be slain by his Guards. A great part of the Kingdom, having been put into
confusion by these enormous cruelties, of which the
King feared the consequences, he thought it his best
way, to prevent further inconveniencies, to set his Brother
John at Liberty under certain conditions, and to
lay the blame of these barbarities upon Joran Peerson
his Favourite, who having been committed to Prison the
Intestine Commotions seemed to be appeased for the present. 
But the King having not long after been very succesful
in several Engagements against the Danes, whom he
beat quite out of Denmark he soon after released his Favourite,
and not only declared him free from any imputation,
but also justified the death of those Lords formerly
murthered at Ʋpsal. By his advise also he would
have taken from his Brothers those Provinces which
were allotted them by their Father's Testament, in exchange
of which he proffered them some Possessions in
Livonia. But the Brothers having refused this proffer,
he again resolved to make away his Brother John at the
Nuptials which were to be celebrated at stockholm betwixt
his Mistress Catharine and himself, and to give his
Widow in Marriage to the Grand Duke of Russia. 
But the Brothers having been advertised of the King's
sinister intentions, did not appear at the Wedding, and
having made an Association with several of the Nobility,

that were Kindred of the Lords murthered at
Ʋpsal, they resolved to dethrone King Erick. The better
to execute their intentions, they had by the intercession
of the King of Poland procured a Truce with
Denmark, and having gathered what Forces and
Mony they could among ••eir Friends, and brought
over some German Forces, that were in King Erick's
service to their side, as also engaged Charles, King Erick's
Brother, to join in the Confederacy, they seised upon
the Castles of stockeburgh, Lackoe and Wadstena, in
the last of which they found a great Treasure. Then
they published their Reasons for taking up Arms against
the King and his evil Counsellours, and marched directly
with their Forces towards stockholm, near which
place having fixed their Tents, they attacked the City
on the side of the Brunckehill; King Erick on the other
side defended himself valiantly for a while, and by
frequent sallies did great mischief, and being mistrustful
of the Citizens of stockholm, he sent a Messenger into
Denmark, to crave assistance from King Frederick; but
this Messenger having been taken and killed by the way
the senate of that City, who despaired to hold out
much longer against the Dukes Forces, and also were
favourers of their party, would have persuaded the
King to a surrendry; which proposition having been
rejected by the King, they whilst the King was at
Church opened the Gates to his Enemies, so that he
narrowly escaped into the Castle. The Dukes Forces
laid then close siege to the Castle, so that King Erick,
having first received Hostages, was forced to come out,
and after having resigned the Crown to surrender himself
a Prisoner to his Brother Duke Charles. The Estates then
assembled at stockholm having also jointly renounced
their Obedience to him, he was made a close Prisoner,
and committed to the care of some of the Friends of the
murthered Lords, who used him most barbarously. § 11. John III. 
          After the Deposition of King Erick, John, was
by the Estates then assembled at stockholm proclaimed
King of sweden,
         1568. who having caused some of those that
had been instrumental in the Murther of the Lords at
Ʋpsal, to be Executed, sent his Ambassadour to Roeshild
         
to treat with the King of Denmark either concerning
a Peace or at least the prolongation of the Truce; But
these Ambassadours having exceeded their Commission,
and agreed to such articles as were very prejudicial to
sweden the whole Transaction was declared void at the
next Dyer, and King John sent other Ambassadours to
desire more moderate propositions of Peace from the
King of Denmark. And to give some sort of satisfaction
to his Brother Charles, unto whom he had formerly promised
a share in the Government, he put him in the
Possession of sudermannia, Nericke and Wermeland,
which Provinces were granted him before pursuant to
his Father's Testament. Then he was Crowned at
Ʋpsal, and having sent back the Russian Ambassadours,
he sent also some of his own into Moscovy to prolong
the Truce betwixt them, but no sooner were they arrived
there, but the Moscovites took them into custody,
and perceiving that the Liflanders would in no ways
submit themselves under their Yoak, they found out this
expedient to put Magnus Duke of Holstein into the
Possession of that Country, with the Title of an Hereditary
King, paying only some small acknowlegement
to the Grand Duke of Moscovy. This Proposition
having been approved of by the King of Denmark Duke
of Holstein, and all the Liflanders in general who were
very willing to live under the jurisdiction of a German
Prince. The Moscovites to put their design in execution
advanced with a great Army, which obliged King
John to make Peace with the Danes, at stetin, upon
very disadvantageous terms. But whilst the Moscovites
had employed all their Forces in Livonia and Finland,
the Tartars being set on by the Poles, fell into Moscovy,
and having taken and burnt the City of Moscovy, cut
above thirty thousand of the Inhabitants to pieces. 
This misfortune proved a main obstacle to their design
upon Livonia,
         1571. yet having made a Truce with the Tartars
and Poles for some years they again entred Livonia
with 80000 Men, and committed most inhuman
barbarities, which the swedes, who were much inferiour
in number, could not prevent at that time. But a
swedish party of 600 Horse and 100 Foot,War with the Moscovites. 
          that were
faln in with the Moscovites, having routed 16000 Moscovites,
         
killing 7000 of them upon the spot, the Czar
of Moscovy was so dismayed that he of his own accord
offered a Treaty of Peace to be set on Foot at Newgarten,
which place being disliked by King John, the War
began a fresh, which was carried on but with very indifferent
success on the swedish side, they having been
repulsed before Wefenbergh and Telsburgh. There happened
also another misfortune in the swedish Camp,
which proved not a little prejudicial to their Affairs;
for the German Horse and scotish Foot that were in
their service came to handy blows, upon some distaste taken
against one another, wherein 1500 scotish Foot were
all cut to pieces by the Germans, except 80 that escaped
their fury, and the Russians not long after surprised the
swedes and Germans, that were drunk in their Camp (and
killed a great many of them upon the spot; and because
the swedes were also not idle on their side, but made
frequent inrodes into the Russian Territories, a Truce
was concluded betwixt them for two years. Most of
the swedes are of opinion that King John might have
prosecuted this War, with more vigour if he had not
been more intent upon a Religious design, than upon
warlike preparations. The business proceeded thus: King John, though he
was Educated a Protestant, yet having been very conversant
with a great many learned Roman Catholicks,
and influenced by his Queen, had resolved to restore
by degrees the Roman Catholic Religion, under pretence
of making a Reformation in the lately introduced
Protestant Religion. To effect this, he intended to follow
the footsteps of Georgius Cassander, that was employed
by the Emperours Ferdinand I. and Maximilian
II. to unite and compose the Religious differences
in Germany, and having called in some Jesuits disguised
in Laymens Habits to be assisting to his secretary
Mr. Pieter Fretenius, who was to be the chief manager
of the business, he at the Convocation of some of the
Bishops and Clergy at stockholm proposed to them a new
form of a Liturgy, wherein a great many of the Popish
Ceremonies were to be used in the Administration of the
sacraments, and Consecration of Bishops and Priests,
as also the Mass was again introduced; which new

Liturgy he got subscribed by the new Consecrated Bishops
and some of the inferiour Clergy, and was called
the Liturgy of the swedish Church, conform to the
Catholick and Orthodox Church. This Liturgy having
been published under the new Archbishop's name in the
swedish and Latin Tongues, the Mass and other Roman
Catholick Hymns were again sung in the swedish
Churches (except in the Territories belonging to Duke
Charles the King's Brother) and the Celibacy of Priests
and other Popish Doctrines mightily extolled in the
Pulpits by these disguised Roman Catholicks. The next
thing to be done was to try whether he could bring over
his Brother Charles to his party whom he sollicited by
his Delegates to introduce the Liturgy into his Territories,
who having made answer that it was, (according
to their Father's Testament) neither in his, nor in the
King's power to make any Innovation in Religion, this
proved the subject of a great misunderstanding betwixt
them. Next the King had his recourse to the Pope,
who also having disapproved his undertaking, he demanded
from the Clergy at stockholm to give their approbation
of the said Liturgy, but these answered that
thereby a door was opened for the Roman Catholick
Religion to be re-established in sweden, and having made
their Appeal to a General synod of that Clergy in the
Kingdom, a Convocation of the Clergy of the Kingdom
(except those in the Duke's Territories) was held
by the King's Authority,1577. where the King's party prevailed,New Liturgy introduced. 
so, that the Liturgy was confirmed not only by
the said Clergy, but also by the Temporal Estates, who
declared all such Traitors as should for the future oppose
the same. The King having gained this point
banished and imprisoned some of those, that would not
conform to the said Liturgy, notwithstanding which a
great many of the Clergy that were professed Enemies
of the said Liturgy, and upheld by Duke Charles did
not only boldly discover the deceitful snares of the adverse
party, but also sent to the German Universities of
Wittembergh, Leipzick, Helmstad, Francfut and others,
where their Zeal for the Augsburg Confession was approved,
and the said Liturgy condemned as dangerous
to the Protestant Religion. Hitherto King Erick had

suffered a very hard imprisonment during the space of
nine years, but he having in the mean while by several
ways endeavoured his delivery, and King John now fearing,
that perhaps these Intestine Divisions might furnish
him with an opportunity to make his escape, he sent his
secretary to give him his last Dose, which he did accordingly,
having poisoned him in a Pease soop. The
King being rid of this danger began now to act more
barefaced than before; for now the Invocation of saints
was publickly taught in the Pulpits, those that contradicted
it were imprisoned, a new University of Papists
was to be erected at stockholm, he sent his Ambassadour
to reside at Rome, and the Pope had his Nuncio at
stockholm, and to compleat the matter, a great many
young scholars were sent to the Jesuits abroad, to be
duely instructed in their Principles. In the mean while
the War betwixt the swedes and Moscovites was carried
on without any remarkable advantage on either side, till
it was agreed betwixt the two Kings of Poland and
sweden, that each of them should act separately against
the Moscovites, and what either of them could gain by
his sword, should remain in his possession. Then it
was that stephen King of Poland having attacked the
Moscovites vigorously on his side, the swedes also under
the Command of Pontus de la Gordie took from the
Moscovites the strong Forthress of Kekholm, the Castle of
Padis, Wesenburgh, Telsburgh, Narva, (where 7000
Moscovites were killed) Jawmagrod and other places of
note, which raised such a jealousie in the Poles that
they not only made a separate Peach with the Moscovites,
         1582. 
but also demanded several of those places, taken
from the Moscovites by the swedes, for their share,
which put a great stop to the swedish progresses, and
occasioned a Truce of two years (which was afterwards
prolonged for four years longer) betwixt them
and the Moscovites. Whilst these things were transacting
the misunderstanding betwixt the King and his
Brother Charles could not be removed, notwithstanding
that the Duke had shown his inclination of having these
Differences composed, but the King having called together
a Dyet at Wadstena, sent a summons to the Duke
to appear there in person. The Duke on the other hand,

who did not altogether trust the King, having assembled
some Forces in his Territories, did not appear at the
said Dyet, but lodged himself in some of the adjacent
Villages, were at last by the mediation of some of the
senators, the Brothers were reconciled, the Duke having
begged the King's pardon,1587. and referred the Differences
concerning the Liturgy to the decision of his Clergy,
who at an Assembly held at strengness rejected the aforesaid
Liturgy. In the mean while died stephen King of
Poland, and his Widow Ar••a being Aunt of Prince sigismund
the son of King John, she prevailed with some
of the great Men in Poland to make him their King,
which was done accordingly, tho' not without great difficulty
on the swedish side, who could not for a great
while agree to the several Propositions made to them by
the Poles, and King sigismund himself seemed soon after
to repent of it. As soon as sigismund had left sweden,
his Father King John began to renew his Care for establishing
the new Liturgy in the Duke's Territories;
but the Clergy there trusting upon the Duke's Authority
and Protection, remaining stedfast in their Opinion; the
King at last being tired out by their constancy, sent for
his Brother Charles to stockholm, where a hearty reconciliation
being made betwixt them, Charles was so dear
to him ever after, that he did nothing without his Advice
or Consent, which Friendship continued betwixt the
two Brothers till a little before the King's death, when
Charles having married Cloristina the Daughter of Adolph
Duke of Holstein, the former jealousy was renewed in
some measure in the King, which soon ceased by his
death,1592. which happened a few Months after at stockholm. 
        § 12. After King John's death had been kept secret
for two days, the same having been notified to Duke
Charles, he forthwith came to stockholm, and having sent
a Messenger to King sigismund in Poland,
         sigismund. he in the mean
while took upon him the Administration of the Government
with the Consent of the senate, which was confirmed
to him by King sigismund for that time. soon
after, he called together the swedish and Gothick Clergy
at Ʋpsat (the Finns refusing to appear) where the Augsburgh
         
Confession was confirmed, and the Liturgy, as also
Popish Ceremonies newly introduced quite abolished. 
This Decree having been approved of by the rest of the
Estates, they also made another, wherein was declared,
That no body should appeal out of sweden to the King
in Poland, and that the King should subscribe these Decrees
before his Coronation. This proved the subject
of great broils afterwards, for the King having understood
what had passed at Ʋpsal, he declared, that he
being a hereditary Prince in sweden, would not oblige
himself to any thing before his Coronation, and as to
the Decrees made at Ʋpsal, he declared them void,
which the Estates looked upon as an ill Omen for the
Protestant Religion in sweden. Their jealousie was also
not a little augmented when they saw King sigismund
come into sweden accompanied by the Pope's Nuncio,
by whose advice the King demanded a Church for the
Roman Catholicks in each City, that the new Archbishop
should be deposed, and that he would be Crowned
by the Pope's Nuncio which obliged the Estates to
send their Deputies to Duke Charles, to desire him to interpose
his Authority with the King. Charles therefore
having in conjunction with the Estates, in vain endeavoured
to perswade the King to a compliance with the
Estates, entred into an Association with them for the
defence of the Protestant Religion, and mustered his
Troops near Ʋpsal. The King perceiving them to be
in earnest, thought it his best way not to let things run
to extremity, but having consented to most of their
Propositions, which he surrendred to them the same
morning when he was to be crowned, the Coronation
was performed by the Bishop of strengness. But no sooner
was he returned to stockholm,
         1594. but he took a resolution
quite contrary to his Promise, with an intention to obtain
by force what he could not get by fair means. 
Wherefore having sent for some Forces out of Poland, he
hoped to terrifie the Estates into a compliance at the
next Dyet, but these being backed by Duke Charles, and
having raised the Delekerls, remained stedfast in their
Resolution. The King seeing himself disappointed again
in his Design, resolved upon the advice of the Poles, to
leave the Kingdom and the Government in an unsettled

Condition, hoping thereby to oblige them to be more
pliable for the future. But as soon as the senators understood
that he was sailed towards Dantzick, they in
conjunction with Duke Charles, took upon themselves
the administration of the Government, deposed the King's
Governour of stockholm (he being a Papi•t) and forbid
the exercise of the Romish Religion. And soon
after, a Peace having been concluded with the Muscovites,
a Dyet was held at sudercoping, where after the Estates
had justified their proceeding in a Letter to the King, the
Augsburgh Confession was again confirmed, the Popish
Religion abolished, and all swedes that adhered to the
same, declared incapable of any Employments in the
Kingdom, and several other Decrees were made against
the Papists, and for the maintaining of the Privileges of
the subjects. Then they constituted Duke Charles Regent
of the Kingdom to govern the same with Advice of
the senate, and the whole Transaction was published
in the Latin, swedish and German Tongues. This having
occasioned a general flight among the Roman
Catholicks out of sweden; King sigismund was so
dissatisfied thereat, that he quickly sent some Commissioners
out of Poland to disswade the Duke from these
proceedings, but also when this proved ineffectual by his
Letter to the Estates he committed the whole management
of Affairs to the senate, excluding the Duke from the
Regency. In the mean while some senators either to
curry favour with the King, or upon some distaste taken
against Duke Charles, had shewn themselves great Favourers
of the King, and declined to appear at the Dyet,
which was appointed to be held under the Duke's Authority
at Arboga. Notwithstanding which, the few senators
and the Estates there present did again confirm the Decrees
lately made at Ʋpsal and sudercoping, declaring
Duke Carles sole Regent of sweden. But Niclaco Flemming
the King's General, being in Arms, and having
lately killed a great number of the Boors, the Duke also
thought it not fit to fit still, but having gathered what
Troops he could, possessed himself first of Gothland, and
not long after of the whole Kingdom of sweden, the
King's Governours and those of the senators, that
had not appeared at the last Dyet held at Arboga, flying

in great numbers to the King in Poland. King sigismund
then perceiving that his presence was absolutely necessary
in sweden, resolved to go thither in Person with 6000 Men,
which the Duke having been advertised of,1598. called together
the Estates of the Gothick Kingdom at Wadstena,
and having made known to them the King's intention,
it was unanimously resolved to meet the King with an
Army near Calmar. But the West-Goths and smalanders
having taken up Arms for the King, and the Finns
equipped some ships for this service, the former were
beat back by the Boors, headed by two Professors of
Ʋpsal, and whilest Duke Charles was sailed with his. 
Fleet to reduce the latter, which he did with good success,
the King without any opposition arrived at Calmar. 
several Treaties were then set on foot to endeavour the
settlement of the Kingdom, and to reconcile Matters
betwixt the King and Duke, which proving ineffectual,
both Parties had recourse to Arms. The first encounter
happened near stegeburgh, where the Duke's Forces being
surrounded, were quickly put to the rout, but laying
down their Arms, obtained Pardon from the King;
but the Duke soon made amends for this Misfortune, at
stangbroo, where having surprised part of the King's
Army, he killed 2000 of them upon the spot, with
the loss of 40 Men on his side. This Defeat occasioned an
agreement betwixt the King and Duke upon certain Articles,
of which the Estates were to be Guarrantees, and
the King promised to come forthwith to stockholm to
settle the Affairs of the Kingdom, whither he would
needs go by sea, tho' it was in October, but in lieu of
sailing to stockholm, directed his Course from Calmar
(where he was droven in by contrary Winds) to Dan•
           zick. 
The Duke being surprised at this unexpected departure,
called together the Estates of the Kingdom,
who having once more constituted him Regent of sweden
at their second meeting at stockholm,
         1599. renounced
their Obedience to King sigismund, offering at the same
time the Crown to his son Ʋladislaus, in case he would
come within a twelve Months time into sweden, and be
educated in the Lutheran Religion, but in case of failure
he and his heirs to be excluded from the Crown. 
Duke Charles thereupon marched against the Finns,
         
whom he quickly forced to Obedience, and having made
an Alliance with the Russians,
         1600. convened the Estates of the
Kingdom in the next following year at sincoping, where
some of the Lords that were here, having before fled into
Poland,
         sigismund deposed. were condemned of High Treason and executed
accordingly, and not only King sigismund declared
incapable of the Crown, but also his son Ʋladislaus
(because he had not appeared within the limited
time) excluded from the succession. About the same
time the Duke being certified that the Eastlanders. and
especially those of Reval were inclined to his side, he marched
thither with a great Army, and being received
very joyfully by the Inhabitants of Reval, the
Polish Governours left the rest of the places of Esthland
voluntarily to the disposition of Charles. The same fortune
artended him at first in Livonia, where he took several
places of note without much opposition, but was
forced to raise the siege of Riga upon the approach of
the Poles, who retook Kakenhausen and some other places
thereabouts. Charles having in the mean time got
notice how the Poles had set up the false Demetrius, and
assisted him against the Muscovites, under pretence of
being afraid of the designs of the Poles against sweden,
desired to resign. But these having first offered
the Crown to John King sigismund's half Brother,
who refused to accept of the same, they bestowed it
upon Charles, who being the only son left of King Gustave,
and by his Valour and Prudence having deserved
so well of the Kingdom, the Crown was confirmed to
his Heirs even to the Females. 1604. No sooner was Charles
declared King,Charles IX. 
          but he undertook an Expedition into
Livonia, where he received a signal overthrow from the
Poles, which might have proved of very ill consequence
to sweden, if King sigismund had not been prevented by
the intestine Commotions of the Poles to pursue his Victory. 
The Russians also had slain the false Demetrius,
and having made one suski their Grand Duke, craved
Assistance from King Charles, who sent some Thousand
Auxilaries under the Command of James de la Gardie,
with whose Assistance they were very successful against
the Poles. But in Lifland the Poles got the better of the

         swedes in several encounters, and the Danes seeing the
swedes engaged on all sides,Warbetwixt the swedes and Poles in Livonia. 
          began to make great preparations
against them. The Muscovites also had delivered
their Grand Duke suski up to the Poles, and offered that
Crown to Ʋladislaus the son of sigismund, so that the
swedish Affairs looked with an ill face at that time, if
Prince Gustave Adolph, King Charles's son by his extraordinary
Valour had not upheld their drooping Courage. 
For whilst the Danes wee busy about Calmar, he
with 1500 Horse, not only surprised their chief Magazin
in Blekinyen, which is now called Christianstad, but
also took from them the Isle of Oeland and the Castle of
Borkholm; and whilst he was busy in putting his Forces
into Winter-Quarters his Father King Charles died at
Nycoping in the 61 year of his age. 1611. 
        § 13. Gustavus Adolphus. 
         Gustavus Adolphus being at the time of his Father's
Death, yet under age, was under the Tuition of
his Mother Christina, Duke John and some of the swedish
senators. But the swedes being at that time embroiled
in the Polish and Russian Affairs, and the Danes pressing
hard upon them, it was concluded at the Dyet at
Nycoping, that King Gustave Adolph, notwithstanding he
was not 18 years of age, should take upon himself the
administration of Affairs. The King immediately applied
all his Care to the Danish War, which was carried
on but with indifferent success on the swedish side especially
by sea, where the Danes played the Masters,
the swedish Fleet being but in a very ill condition; and
the Danes having taken besides Calmar, also Risbyfort and
Elffesburgh, two considerable places in sweden. King
Gustave finding this War very grievous to the Kingdom,
and the Muscovites having about the same time declared
themselves very favourably in behalf of his Brother
Charles Philip, (unto whom they offered that Crown)
a Peace was concluded with the Danes, the swedes being
obliged to pay them a Million of Crowns for these
three places above-mentioned. In the mean while James
de la Gardie had so well managed his Affairs in Muscovy,
         1613. 
that the Chiefest among them desired King Gustave
Adolph, and his Brother Charles Philip to come into Muscovy,
but King Gustave Adolph who had more mind to

unite that Crown with sweden than to leave it to his
Brother, was not only very slow in his Resolution, but
also at last in his Answer to the Muscovites only spoke of
his own coming thither, without mentioning his Brother,
which having been interpreted by the Muscovites as if he
intended to make their Country a Province of sweden,
they made one Michael Foedorowitz Romano their Grand
Duke, and when Prince Charles Philip afterwards came
into Muscovy, some of them for a while adhered to him,
but the new Grand Duke having the stronger Party, the
rest also at last left the swedish side, who vigorously attacked
and beat the Muscovites in several Engagements,
and took from them some of their Frontier places,Peace with the Muscovites. 
          till
at last a Peace was concluded betwixt both Partys at
stolbova, by the mediation of the English, by vertue of
which,1617. the swedes got Kerholm and Ingermanland. 
        In the mean while a Truce had been concluded with
Poland for two years, but the same being near exspiring,
King Gustave Adolph resolved to pursue the War against
the Poles with more vigour than before. The better to
put this Design in execution, he after his Coronation
had been performed at Ʋpsal with an universal Joy of
the People,1617. paid to Christian King of Denmark the residue
of the sum due to him by vertue of the last Treaty of
Peace; and having married Mary Eleonora the Daughter
of John sigismund Elector of Brandenburgh,
         1620. he attacked
the City of Riga, which defended it self for six weeks
bravely, but being reduced to the last extremity, surrendred
it self upon very honourable Terms. From
hence he sailed towards Dantzick, to carry the War
into Prussia, but King sigismund being then at Dantzick,
the Truce was renewed for two years longer. 
During the time of the Truce a Peace was proposed betwixt
these two Crowns, which the Polish Estates were
very desirous of, notwithstanding which, King sigismund
persisted in his former Resolution of pursuing the War. 
King Gustave therefore again entred Livonia with a good
Army, where having defeated 3000 Lithuanians, who
under the Command of stanislaus sariecha would have
disputed his Passage, Kakenhausen, Dorpt, and other
places of less note, surrendred themselves to the King. 
From hence he advanced into Lithuania, and took Birsew,
         
and tho' the Poles had nothing left in Livonia, but
only Duneburgh, and the Lithuanians were again defeated
by the swedes near Walsow in sem-Gallia; King
sigismund persisted in his Resolution of carrying on the
War, being encouraged by the Emperour, who then
was very successful in Germany. King Gustave then resolving
to give the Poles a home-stroke,1626. sailed with a
Fleet of 80 ships and 26000 Landmen towards the Pillaw,
where by Order of the Elector of Brandenburgh,
having been received without opposition, he landed his
Men, and without any resistance took Brandenburgh and
Frauenburgh. The next was Elbingen, where the Citizens
having made some shew of resistance, the senate
surrendred the City without making as much as a Capitulation. 
The same good Fortune attended him before
Marienburgh,
         The War carried on against the Poles in Prussia. 
          
         Meve, Dirshaw, stum, Christburgh and other
places in Prussia, which all fell into his hands, before
the Poles had notice of his arrival. soon after the Poles
sent 8000 Horse and 3000 Foot into Prussia, who had
formed a design to surprise Marienburgh, but were repulsed
with the loss of 4000 Men, and were also forced
to raise the siege of Meve. And stanislaus Konierpol ki
with his Podolians also besieged Dirshaw in vam, but retook
Pautske from the swedes, and dispersed some Germen
Troops that were listed in Germany for the service
of King Gustave. In the next spring the swedish
King having received new supplies out of sweden,
         1627. intended
to attack Dantzick, but having received a shot
in the Belly before one of their out-works, he desisted
for that time, but soon after made himself Master of
the said Fort, having first beaten the Poles that came
to its relief, who nevertheless, in the mean while had
forced Meve to a surrendry. soon after, both Armies
encamped near Dirshaw, where King Gustave having
drawn out his Forces in Battel array, the Poles did the
like, having a boggy Ground before them, which the
King did not think fit to pass with his Army; but when
the Poles began to draw off again into their Camp, the
King falling into the Rear, killed them a great number
of Men. But some days after, attacking them in
their Camp, he received a shot in his left shoulder with
a Musquet Bullet, which his Forces being dismayed at,

they returned without any further Action into their
Camp. Towards the latter end of the year, a new
Treaty having been set on foot betwixt the two Kings,
the Treaty was so far advanced, that King sigismund
had resolved to sign it the next day, if the Austrians
(who did promise to send 24 Men of War and 12000
Men to his assistance) had not prevented it. After the
Treaty was broke off, King Gustave, before his Army
went into Winter-quarters, took several places from the
Poles, and at the beginning of the year next following,
attacked a Fort near Dantzick, but was repulsed with
loss. soon after he had a smart Engagement with the
Poles, wherein 3000 of them were killed upon the spot,
the swedes having taken four pieces of Cannon, and fourteen
standards, tho' not without great blood-shed on
their side. Then the King advanced nearer unto Dantzick,
having sent eight Men of War to block up that
Harbour, but the Dantzickers with ten Men of War
having attacked the swedish squadron, they killed the
swedish Admiral Nils sternshield, took his ship, forced
their Vice-Admiral to blow up his own ship, and put
the rest to flight, tho' the Dantzickers also lost their Admiral
and 400 Men in this Engagement. King Gustave then
having detached 1000 foot souldiers, who passed the
Veixel in Boats, they surprised Niewburgh, which being
a Magazin of the Poles, they took most of their Baggage
and 600000 Crowns in Money. 1629. But in the year
next following, he gave them more work; for Herman
Wrangel raised the Blockade of Brodnitz where 3000
Poles were killed, 1000 taken Prisoners, with five Pieces
of Cannon and 2000 Waggons with Provision. The
Poles being frightened at this Defeat, were very desirous
then to receive the Imperial Forces which were sent to
their Assistance under the command of Arnheim, who
with 5000 Foot and 2000 Horse, joined Koniccpoliski,
the Polish General near Graudentz. King Gustave on
the other hand encamped with an Army of 5000 Horse
and 8000 Foot near Quidzin; and tho' the swedes were
much inferiour in number, yet did they not refuse the
Combate; and both Armies soon after having met near
stum, there happened a brisk Engagement betwixt
them, wherein the swed•sh Horse were first repulsed,

with the loss of five standards, but the King coming up
in Person with more Forces, soon forced the Poles to retreat,
who would have passed over a Bridge which
they were laying over the River of Nogat. But King
Gustave endavouring to cut off their retreat that way, the
Fight was renewed on both sides with great fury, so that
the King venturing himself too far, was taken hold of by
his shoulder-belt, which he slipping over his head, got
free of them, leaving his Hat and Belt behind him. 
But immediately after, another catching hold of his
Arm. would have carried him off, if one Erick soop had
not shot the Polander, and delivered the King. In this
Action the swedes got seventeen Colours and five standards,
the Imperial Forces having received the greatest
damage. Not long after, there happened another Engagement
about the same Bridge, where the Poles were
again repulsed, and in the attack of stum, they lost
4000 Men of their best Forces. The Poles having imputed
these Losses chiefly to Arnheim the Imperial General
(who being a Vassal of the Elector of Brandenburgh,
was suspected by them to hold a correspondence with the
said Prince) and being grown quite weary of the Imperial
Forces, being also pestered with Famine and the
Plague, by the mediation of France, England, Brandenburgh
and Holland, a Truce was concluded for six years,
by vertue of which, King Gustave was to restore to Poland,
Brodnitz Wormdit, Melsack, stum and Dirshaw, Marienburgh
was committed to the custudy of the Elector of
Brandenburgh, King Gustave kept the Castle and Harbour
of Pillaw and Mem•l,
         Truce with Poland. 
          as also Elbingen and Braunsbergh,
besides all what he was possessed of in Livonia, so that
King Gustave Adolph had ended both the Russian and
Polish War to his eternal Honour and the great Advantage
of his Kingdom. § 14. German War. 
          But he was not long at rest before Germany was
the scene where he acquired everlasting Glory to his
Nation, and performed some of the greatest Actions that
were ever seen in Europe. As soon as the Protestants in
Germany began to be jealous of the Roman Catholicks
sinister Intentions against them, they were then for
bringing King Gustave over to their Alliance; but he
being at that time entangled in the Polish Affairs, was

not at leisure to engage himself with them. 1626. But Christian
IV. King of Denmark who was ambitious of that
Honour, having in the mean while received a great
Defeat from the Imperialists, who since that had made
themselves Masters of the Lower saxony, and got footing
on the Baltick, King Gustave fearing the consequence
of it, pressed the harder upon the Poles to oblige them
to a Peace or Truce;1623. and having called together the
Estates of sweden, he represented to them the danger
which threatened sweden from the Imperialists, who had
not only got footing on the Baltick, but also made
themselves Masters of a part of Denmark; whereupon
it having been resolved by the Estates, that it was not
advisable to stay till the Enemy should attack them at
home, but to meet him abroad and to keep him from
getting footing on the Borders of the Baltick, the
King only waited an opportunity to put this Design in
execution, which presented it self in the same year. 
For Albert Wallenstein, Duke of Friedland, the Imperial
General, having laid a Design against the City of strahlsund,
the King who was then in Prussia, offered his Assistance
to that City, and having sent them voluntarily
some Ammunition, and exhorted them to a vigorous
Defence; the Citizens accepted of the King's offer, making
an Alliance with him for the Defence of their
City and Harbour, and to maintain their Commerce in
the Baltick. Pursuant to this Treaty, the King sent
some of his Forces to their assistance, who were very instrumental
in defending that City against the Imperialists,
but he did not think fit to attempt any thing further
at that time, because Wallenstein and Tilly were
with two considerable Armies not far off. But as soon
as the •ol•sh War was ended, he resolved not to make
any further delay. Having therefore in vain proffered
his mediation for the procuring of a Peace in Germany,
and represented again to the Estates of sweden the necessity
of meeting the Imperialists with an Army abroad,
he with all expedition prepared himself for the next
Campagne,1630. and having sent Alexander Lesley with some
Troops before, to drive the Imperialists out of the Isle
of Rugen (which he effected) and settled his Affairs at
home, he embarked with 92 Companies of Foot, and 16

of Horse (which were however considerably augmented
afterwards by some Regiments raised in Prussia) and
landed the 24 of June at Ʋsedom. 
         Charles Gustave lands with his Forces in Germany. 
          Upon his arrival
the Imperialists having left their Forts thereabouts and
at Wollin, he re-embarked his souldiers with a Train of
Artillery in some small Vessels and directly took his
course towards stetin, and having obliged the Duke of
Pomerania to receive him and his Forces into that City,
he made a defensive Alliance with him. From hence he
marched to stargard, Anclam, Ʋckermund and Wolgast,
all which places he took without much opposition. And
whilest King Gustave acted with such success against the
Imperialists in Pomerania, Christian Withelm administrator
of Magdeburgh (who had been deposed by the Emperour)
had got into the possession again of the City
and Territories of Magdeburgh, whither King Gustave sent
D•cterick of Falekenbergh to be assisting to the said Administrator
in settling his Affairs that were then in great
confusion. In the mean while several Regiments of Liflanders
and Finlanders were arrived under the Command
of Gustave Horn, these having been joined by such
Troops as were lately come out of Prussia, the King left
his Camp near stetin, he himself marching with his
Army into Mecklenburgh. In his absence the Imperialists
had endeavoured to force the swedish Camp near stetin,
but were vigorously repulsed, and at his return he also
beat them out of Greiffenhagen and Gartz, nay, even
out of the furthermost parts of Pomerania, and the New
Marck. The Archbishop of Bremen, Duke George of
Lunenburgh, and William Landgrave of Hesse, then entred
into an Alliance with the King, and the Protestant
party in general being encouraged at the success, began
to consider of ways and means to rid themselves of the
Roman Catholick yoke. At the beginning of the next ensuing year,1631. King Gustave
at last concluded the so long projected Alliance
with France,
         Alliance made with France. 
          by vertue of which he was to receive a
yearly subsidy of 400000 Crowns from the French
King. Having thus strengthned himself, he notwithstanding
the Winter season, took Lokenitz, Prentzlow,
New Br•ndenburgh, Clempenow, Craptow and Leitz, without
much opposition. Demmin also, where the Duke of

         Lavelli was in Garrison with two Regiments, was surrendred
after a siege of three Days, and Colberg surrendred
after a Blockade of five Months. The Emperour
in the mean while perceiving that his Generals were
not able to cope with King Gustave Adolph, had given to
Tilly the Bavarian General the supreme Command over
his Forces, who being an antient experienced and renowned
Captain marched directly to the relief of Demmin,
but having received intelligence that the place
was surrendred before, he fell with great fury upon
Kniphausen who lay with two Regiments of swedes at
New Brandenburgh, which being a place of no defence,
he forced after a brave resistance, killing most of the
Common souldiers. But perceiving that King Gustave
being strongly entrenched, was not to be forced in his
Camp, he directed his march upwards to Magdeburgh,
in hopes to draw the King out of his advantageous Post. 
But King Gustave marched directly towards Franckfort
upon the Oder, where the Earl of shaumburgh lay with
a small Army, notwithstanding which, he took the place
by storm after a siege of three Days, slew 700 of the
Enemies and took 800, among whom were a great
many Officers of note: From hence he sent a Detachment
to Landsbergh, to endeavour to drive also the Imperialists
from thence. About the same time a general
meeting of the Protestant German Princes was held at
Leipzick▪
          where a League was proposed to be made in
opposition to the demanded res•itution of the Church-Lands. 
Thither King Gustave sent some of his Ministers
to exhort them to a mutual Union against the Emperour,
and to demand some assistance from them of Men and
Money. But the Elector of saxony was very backward
in declaring himself positively, pretending several reasons,
but in effect intended to make himself head of the Protestant
League, and in the mean while to take this opportunity
of putting the Protestants in a good posture,
and to keep the ballance betwixt the Emperour and the
swedes. King Gustave therefore perceiving that the Protestants
in Germany were so very cunning and overcautious,
thought it his best not to venture his Army at
the discretion of others, wherefore tho' he was very willing
to have relieved the City of Magdeburgh, which was

reduced to extremity, yet did he not think it advisable
to march thither before he had secured his retreat. To
render therefore his design effectual, he marched with his
Army strait to Berlin, and having obliged the Elector of
Brandenburgh, partly by fair words, partly by threats, to
put into his hands the Forts of spandau and Custrin for
the security of a retreat over the two Rivers of the Havel
and Oder, he would have straitways marched to the
relief of the City of Magdeburgh, if the Elector of saxony
would have joined him, but whilest the said Electors
made a great many tergiversations, the said City was
taken by storm by General Tilly,
         The City of Magdeburgh taken by the Imperialists, 10 May. 
          who miserably burnt
the City, and killed most of the Inhabitants, there having
been but 400 left of a great many thousands. After
this Disaster, King Gustave having published his Reasons,
why he could not timely enough relieve that City,
and having cleared the whole Pomerania of the Imperialists,
he divided his Army, and having sent part of his
Forces to the assistance the Dukes of Mecklenburgh, he
marched with the rest into Marck and encamped at
Werben near the River Elbe, to observe Tilly, who
having received Intelligence of the King's arrival near
that River, was obliged to alter his march (which he
intended to have directed towards saxony) in hopes to
force the King to a Battel. But the King surprised his
Avaint-Guard near Wolmerstadt, where he totally ruined
three Regiments of Horse. Notwithstanding which,
Tilly approached near the King's Camp at Werben, but the
King refusing of fight, and he not daring to attack him
in his Camp, he was for want of Forrage, obliged to
march back to his former Camp at Wolmerstadt. In the
mean while the Dukes of Mecklenburgh had with the
assistance of the swedish Auxiliaries driven the Imperialists
out of their Territories, except Domitz, Wismar and Rostock,
which places they also kept blocked up. And about
the same time James Marquis of Hamilton came
with 6000 English and scots into Pomerania, but stood
the King in no great stead, most of them dying in the
same year by several Diseases. But Tilly seeing that he
could not attack the King near Werben, decamped from
Wolmerstadt and marched to Eisleben, and from thence
to Halli, from whence he marched with 40000 Men

to Leipsick, which he took soon after. The Elector of
saxony being thus put to a nonplus, was then forced to
send to King Gustave, and to desire him to join his Army
which lay encamped near Torgawi, the King who had
foreseen what would befal him, being already advanced
near New Brandenburgh; and tho' the King was very glad
of this opportunity, yet because the Elector being now
put to a nonplus, now desired what he had resused
before, he proposed to him certain Conditions, which
the Elector having readily granted, he passed the River
Elbe near Wittenbergh with 13000 Foot and 9000 Horse,
and joined the Elector near Dieben. Then a Council
of War having been called (where the Elector of Brandenburgh
also was present) the King, who did not exspect
that the old cunning General would give them
any opportunity to fight, was for acting very cautiously;
but the Elector of saxony was not for protracting the
War, telling them that if the rest refused he would
fight alone: This opinion at last prevailed, the King
then thought it most convenient to attack him immediately
before he could be joined by the Generals Altringer
and Tieffenbach, the first of which was already arrived
near Erffurt, the second being on his march out
of silesia. Thereupon the command of the right Wing
being left to the King, that of the left to the Electors,
they marched towards the Enemy. Tilly had no sooner
been informed of their approach, but he began to fortifie
himself in his Camp near Leipzick. 
         Battel near Leipzick. 7. sept. 
          But Papenheim and
the rest of the Imperial Generals trusting too much upon
the bravery of their Veteran Bands, and despising the
new Levies of the saxons and the swedes that were tired
out by long march would by all means fight the Enemy
in the Plains near Braitenfeld, where Tilly lost the fruits
of his former Victories. He had possessed himself of all
the rising Grounds where he had planted his Cannon,
and had also the advantage of the Wind; but King
Gustave who had put some Battalions of Foot among the
squadrons of Horse, by wheeling about, got the advantage
of the Wind from him, and having obliged the
Imperialists to open their left Wing, John Banner fell in
among them and brought them into confusion. But the
greatest force of the Imperialists fell upon the saxons,
         
whose Infantry and some of the Militia Horse were put
to flight, which obliged the King to fall with his Wing
upon the Enemy's Horse that were in pursuit of the
saxons, whom he quickly also forced to fly. But the
Imperial Infantry still held out, till Gustave's Horse with
some squadrons of the right Wing fell into their Flank;
and the King about the same time having taken all the Enemy's
Artillery, they were put to an entire rout on all
sides, leaving 7600 Men dead upon the spot, besides
what was killed in the pursuit, 5000 Prisoners took service
under the King. Tilly himself who refused Quarter,
was likely to have been killed by a Captain of
Horse, if Rodulf Maximiliun Duke of saxon-Lauenburgh
had not delivered him by shooting the Captain thro' the
head. The swedes took above 100 standards and Colours,
but lost 2000 Men most of them Horse; the saxons
lost 3000, who quickly retook Leipzick, whilest the
King marched towards Merseburgh, where he out to
pieces 1000 of the Enemies, and took 500 Prisoners. 
Then it was resolved at a Council of War held at Halle,
not to follow Tilly, who was retired towards the River
of Weser, but to carry their victorious Arms into the
Emperour's hereditary, and other Roman Catholick
Countries thereabouts. After some dispute it was agreed
that the King should march towards Franconia, whilest
the Elector of saxony entred the hereditary Countries of
the Emperour. Pursuant to this agreement, the King
marched towards Erffurt, (where William Duke of Weimar
was received without opposition) and from thence
into Franconia, where he took Koningshofen and sweinfurt
without any opposition, and the Castle of Wurtzburgh
after some resistance. In the mean while Tilly the
Imperial General having been reinforced by several Troops
that were before dispersed in Germany, was come to the
relief of Wurtzburgh, but coming too late, marched toward
the River of the Tauber to cover the Bavarian and
the Emperour's hereditary Countries on that side, but in
his march the swedes falling into his Rear, cut off four
entire Regiments. The King having then made an Alliance
with the Marquis of Anspach marched towards the
Rhine, surprised Hanaw, but Franckfort on the River of
Mayn surrendred voluntarily, and having possessed himself

of the whole Country of Ringau, directed his march
into the Palatinate, which was then in the possession of
the spaniards. soon after entring the Berghstrate he
took Gersheim, and passed the Rhine near stockstadt, having
defeated the spaniards that would have disputed
his Passage, and at Oppenheim he cut 500 spaniards in
pieces, but the Garrison of Mayence surrendred upon Articles,
and Landaw, spiers, Weissenburgh and Mainheim,
fell soon after into the King's hands. Rostock also and
Wismar having in the mean while been surredred, the
Baltick sea-Coast was cleared from the Imperialists. 
And the Members of the Circle of the Lower saxony at
an Assembly held at Hamburgh, had resolved to levy
6000 Foot and 500 Horse for the defence of that Circle. 
The Elector of saxony in the mean while having refused
the offers made to him by the spanish Ambassadour, had
sent his Army under the command of Lieutenant General
Arnheim into Bohemia, where among other places they
had taken the City of Prague; but having conceived a
jealousy against the King (whom he suspected to aim at
the Imperial Crown) he could not be prevailed upon to
march further into Moravia and Austria. And the Imperial
Court seeing that Tilly was no more able to cope
with the King, resolved to give the supreme Command
of the Imperial Forces to Wallenstein, who being an old
experienced souldier, and in great Authority among the
souldiers, had besides this gathered such riches that he
was able to raise an Army at his own charge. He having
been at last prevailed upon to take upon him the supreme
Command, raised an Army of 40000 Men against the
next spring. 1637. But whilest these Preparations were making
at Vienna, the King's Forces, notwithstanding the Winter
season, having beaten the spaniards upon the Moselle,
had taken Creutznach, Braunfels Kobenhausen and
Kirchbergh, and the King having left the supreme direction
of Affairs on the Rhine to Axel Oxenstirn, he himself
towards the spring marched into Franconia. But
Tilly at his approach, retired on the other side the Danube,
the King possessed himself of all the places along that
River as far as Ʋlm, from whence he marched towards
the River of Lech, where Tilly had entrenched himself
in a Forest on the other side of that River. Here it was

that General Tilly was wounded by a Canon Bullet,
of which he died in a few days after at Ingolstadt. 
His Army being dismayed at the loss of their General
left their advantageous Post, and the swedes having cut
1000 of them in pieces in their retreat marched straightways
into the Country of Bavaria, where they took
possession of Raio, and Niewburgh upon the Danube. 
Augsburgh surrendred without much resistance. But
their design upon Ingolstadt and Ratisbonne miscarried,
being repulsed at the first, where the King's Horse was
shot under him, and Christopher the Marquis of Baden
killed by his side, but the latter the Elector of Bavaria
had secured by throwing some of his Forces into the
place. The King therefore returning into Bavaria set that
Country under Contribution, and the City of Municken
opened its Gates to the King. In the mean while General
Wallenstein, having left the Elector of Bavaria
a while to shift for himself, had driven the saxons out
of Bohemia, by the treachery of their General Arnheim,
who was an utter Enemy of King Gustave, and the
Imperialists under Lieutenant General Pappenheim had
made considerable progresses in the Circle of the Lower
saxony, Wallenstein also had taken a resolution to fall
with all his Forces upon the King in the Country of
Bavaria. Pursuant to this resolution, the Elector of
Bavaria having left a sufficient Garrison at Ingolstadt
and Ratisbonne, marched towards Egen to join Wallenstein,
whom the King pursued in hopes to hinder their
conjunction, but coming too late, he encamped near
Numbergh, till he could be joined by his Forces that
were dispersed in several parts of Germany. Wallenstein
then made a shew as if he would turn his Arms against
the Elector of saxony, thereby to draw the King out
of his advantageous Post near that City; but the King
remaining in his Post he marched towards him, spreading
his Cavalry all round about, which occasioned
a great scarcity of Forage in the King's Camp, but as for
Provisions he was sufficiently supplyed withal from
Numbergh. Whilst the King was reduced to these
straits he received a reinforcement of 15000 Foot, and
10000 Horse from several places, so that being now
superiour in number he attacked Wallenstein in his Camp,

who being strongly Entrenched repalsed the swedes with
the loss of 2000 Men. In the mean time the Imperial
General Pappenheim had beat the Hessians near Volckmarsen,
had forced the Duke of Lunenburgh to raise the
siege of Callenbergh, had beat General Baudist from
before Paterborn and Hoxter, had relieved Wolffenbuttel,
and taken Hildesheim, from whence he was marched
into Thuringia, to join Wallenstein. On the other hand
the saxons were entred silesia with an Army of 16000
Men, where meeting with no opposition, they might
have carried all before them, if their General Arnheim
had not been treacherous to King Gustave, whom he
hated, and was for working a reconciliation betwixt the
Emperour and the Elector of saxony. The King therefore,
not to lose any more time, having put a good Garrison
into Numbergh, resolved to send part of his Army
into Franconia, and with the main Body to return towards
the Danube into Bavaria, where he had taken
several places on the River of Lech. But whilst he was
carrying on his victorious Arms among the Roman Catholicks,
frequent Messengers were sent to him by the
Elector of saxony craving his assistance against Wallenstein,
who was with all his Forces entred into Misnia. 
The King though he had great reason to be dissatisfied
with the Elector, yet fearing he might be forced to
make a separate Peace with the Emperour, if he did not
come to his assistance; he having left some Forces in
Bavaria and suabia, under the Command of Paltsgrave
Christian of Berckenfeld, and commanded Gustave
Horn to remain in Alsatia, where he forced Benfelden to
surrender, (as Franckenthal was about the same time
forced to surrender by Famine) himself marched with
the Army towards Misnia. Being arrived at Nauenbu•gh
he received information that the Enemies had raised the
siege of Werssenfels, and that they had detached Pappenheim
with some Forces upon another design. Having
therefore resolved not to stay for the Duke of Lunenburgh,
who being already arrived at Wittenbergh, was
to have joined him, but to fight the Enemy before he
could be rejoined by Pappenheim. Pursuant to this resolution
he marched to the great Plains near Lutzen,
         Battel near Lutzen. Nov. 6. 
where a most bloody Battel was fought betwixt them,

in which the swedish Infantry fell with such fury upon
the Imperial Foot that they routed them, and made
themselves Masters of their Cannon. But the swedish
Horse being stopt by a broad Ditch, (that was cut cross
the Plains for the conveniency of floating of Wood)
the King put himself at the Head of the smaland Regiment
of Horse, encouraging the rest by his example
to follow him. Thus furiously advancing before the rest,
and being only accompanyed by Francis Albucret Duke
of saxen Launenburgh, and two Grooms, he there lost
his life. Concerning his death there are different opinions,
but the most probable is, that he was shot by the
said Duke of Lauenburgh, who was set on by the Imperialists
that had their only hopes in the King's death. 
The swedes were so far from being dismayed at the King's
death,King Gustave Adolfe killed. that they fell with great fury again upon the
Enemy, whom they routed on all sides. The Imperialists
having been rejoined by Pappenheim would have
rallied again, but Pappenheim having also been killed,
they were routed a second time, leaving an entire Victory
to the swedes, which was nevertheless dearly purchased
by the death of so great a King. § 15. Christina. The death of this great King caused great alterations
in Europe, for, though the Imperialists had lost
the Battel and a great many brave Officers,1633. yet were
they in no small hopes that the swedish Affairs would
now sink under their own weight, and therefore made
great preparations against them the next Campagne. The
Protestants in Germany were by his death divided into
several Factions, not knowing whom they should choose
for their Head, and the swedes overwhelmed with troubles,
his Daughter Christina being then but six years of
Age. Nevertheless, having settled their Affairs at
Home, and committed the Administration of the Kingdom
to the five chief Officers of the state, the chief
management of the Affairs in Germany was committed
to the care of the Lord Chancellour Oxenstirn, who
having been sent by the King's order into the higher Germany,
received this sad News at Hanau. The Chancellour
did not so much fear the Power of his Enemies
as their constancy and unanimous Resolution, whereas

the Protestants were divided in their Counsels and Opinions,
and were not likely to follow his directions after
the King's death, it being not probable that the Electors
and Princes of the Empire would be commanded by a
Foreign Nobleman; nevertheless he thought it not advisable,
by leaving their Conquests, to ruin at once the
Protestant Cause and the Interest of sweden, but rather
to endeavour by a brave resistance to obtain an honorable
Peace. Having therefore sent some Regiments back into
sweden, he divided his Army, and having sent 14000
Men under the Command of George Duke of Lunenburgh
into the Lower saxony and Westphalia, the last
were ordered into Franconia, and some Forces were also
detached towards silesia. These Forces acted with
good success agaist the Imperialists, especially in Westphalia,
where the Duke of Lunenburgh took several
places, defeated the Earl of Mansfeld near Rinteln and
besieged the City of Hamelen. But in silesia the Common
Cause was not carried on with the same forwardness,
by reason of the misunderstanding betwixt the
swedish and saxon Generals, the latter of which keeping
a secret Correspondency with Wallenstein, left the
swedes in the Lurch, who were at last miserably beaten
by the said Wallenstein. But in all other places they
had better success, where their Generals took several
places of note, and the Duke of Lunenburgh had also
retaken the strong City of Hamelen by accord, after
having defeated 15000 Imperialists that were coming to
its relief, whereof 2000 were killed upon the spot, and
as many taken Prisoners. Thus the swedish Army were
every where flourishing but in silesia, nevertheless the
burthen of the War grew heavier upon them every
day, most of their Confederates being grown weary of
the War, and willing to be rid of the swedes. Whilst
they laboured under these difficulties, Wallenstein being
faln in disgrace and killed by the Emperour's order, they
hoped to reap some advantage by this Change, but the
Emperour having made the King of Hungary (his son)
General of his Army, who having taken Ratisbonne, and
being joined by the spanish Forces that were marching
towards the Netherlands besieged Nordlingen, where the
swedish Avantguard intending to possess themselves of

a Hill near that City, were engaged with the Imperialists,
         1634. 
which occasioned a Battel betwixt the two Armies,Aug. 27. 
and the swedish Left Wing having been brought into
disorder by the Polish,
         Battel of Nordlingen. 
          
         Hungarian and Croatian Horse,
was forced back upon their own Infantry, which also
were brought iuto Confusion and totally routed, 6000
having been slain upon the spot, a great number taken
Prisoners, among whom was Gustave Horn, and 130
Colours were lost, besides the whole Artillery and
Baggage. After this Battel the whole Upper Germany
being over-run by the Imperialists, and the Elector
of saxony having made a separate Peace with the
Emperour, the swedish Affairs seemed to be reduced to a
very ill condition, especially since the Elector of Brandenburgh
also had sided with the saxons, and the Truce
with the Poles was near expired about the same time,
which made the swedes very desious of a Peace; but
the same not being to be obtained in Germany they
were fain to prolong the Truce with the Poles for twenty
six years,Truce prolonged with the Poles. 
          and to restore to them their so dearly beloved
Prussia, and to draw France into Germany to their assistance,
to put them in the Possession of Philipsburgh. 
Thus having in a manner settled their Affairs, the War
broke out betwixt them and the Elector of saxony, who
offered them a recompence of mony for the Archbishoprick
of Magdeburgh, which the swedes refusing
to accept of, there happened a sharp Engagement betwixt
them near Allenburgh upon the Elbe, where of
7000 saxons,
         War betwixt the swedes and Elector of saxony. 
          one half were killed, and the rest taken
Prisoners. Notwithstanding this advantage the swedes
had no small obstacles to surmount, since the Emperour
was in Possession of the whole Upper Germany, and
had besides this set the Elector of saxony upon their
Back, which obliged the swedes to take new Measures,
and being now left by all their Confederates, they were
at liberty at least to act more unanimously, though perhaps
with less force, the effects of which appeared soon
after; for though the Elector of saxony had the good
fortune to retake Magdeburgh from the swedes, yet they
soon after revenged this loss near Perlebergh where they
attacked the said Elector with a less number in his fortified
Camp, and having routed his Army killed 5000

upon the spot, besides what were killed in the pursuit,
1100 being killed on the swedish side, and 3000
wounded, and having soon after droven the Imperialists
out of Hessia into Westphalia, and regained Erffurt,
they were again in a fair way to get footing in High Germany. 
They had also in the next ensuing year several
Encounters with the Imperialists and saxons,
         1637. which
proved most to their advantage, Banner having defeated
eight saxon Regiments near Edlenburgh, and soon after
2000 more near Pegau, and when the Imperialists thought
to have got him with his whole Army into their
Clutches near Custrin, he got off with great dexterity,
but could not prevent, but that the Imperialists took
several places in Pomerania, as also near the Rivers of
Havel and Elbe; George Duke of Lunenburgh having
also declared against the swedes, who also began to be
extremely jealous of Brandenburgh by reason of his pretension
upon Pomerania, after the death of Bagislaus XIV. 
the last Duke of Pomerania, (who dyed this year) an
Alliance was concluded betwixt them and France for
three years. The swedes having been brought the year before
somewhat in the straits,1638. they now,Alliance with France. 
          after having received
fresh Recruits began to recover what they had lost the
year before, Banner having driven Gallas the Imperial
General back even into the Hereditary Countries of the
Emperour. And Bernhard Duke of Weimar had the
same success on the Rhine, where having besieged Rhinefelden,
he fought twice with the Imperialists, that came
to its relief, and having routed them in the second Engagement
took Rhinefelden, Kuteln and Fryburgh in
Brisgau. After this exploit having blocked up Brisack
so closely that it was reduced to the utmost by Famine,
the Imperialists endeavoured to relieve it with 12000
Men, which were so received by the said Duke that
scarce 2500 escaped. And not long after the Duke
of Loraine having attempted its relief with 3500
Men, the same were also cut in pieces, and the
place surrendred to the Duke. The Imperialists having
been thus routed both near the Rhine and in the Lower
saxony, the Duke and John Banner had both taken a
resolution to carry the War into the Emperour's Hereditary

Countries, and Banner marched straitways (after
several Defeats given to the Imperialists and saxons)
into Bohemia, where he in all likelihood might have had
great success if the untimely death of Duke Bernhard
(who was to join him) had not broke his Measures. 
This Duke being sollicited by the French to surrender
Brisack into their Hands, (which he refused) was
Poisoned by them, and his Army with great promises
and mony debauched to submit under the French Command. 
The Imperialists then growing too strong for Banner
alone in Bohemia, he marched back into Misnia
and Thuringia, and having been joined by the Duke of
Longueville, who Commanded the Army of the lately
deceased Duke of Weimar and by some Hessians and
Lunenburghers near Erffurt (which made up an Army of
21 Brigades and 2000 Horse) he would fain have Fought
the Imperialists, but these avoiding to come to a Battel
the Campagne was most spent in marching up and down
the Country. But at the beginning of the next ensuing
year Banner had very near surprised the City of Ratisbonne,
         1641. 
where the Emperour and the Estates of the
Empire were then assembled, if the Ice which was by
which was by a sudden Thaw loosned in the River, had
not hindred them from laying a Bridge of Boats, which
design having miscarried, Banner resolved to carry the
War again into Moravia, silesia, and Bohemia. But
the Weimarian Forces under the Command of the
French General having left him thereabouts, the Imperialists
had so closely beset him, that there was no way
left to retreat but through the Forest of Bohemia, which
was done with all expedition, having left Colonel slange,
with three Regiments of Horse behind, who after a
brave resistance were all made Prisoners of War, but
saved the swedish Army, which would else have been in
great danger if they had not detained the Imperialists,
the swedish Army being arrived but half an hour before
them at the Pass of Presswitz, where they stopt the
Enemies march. Not long after dyed the famous
swedish General John Banner,
         May 10. whose death caused some
dissatisfaction in the Army, notwithstanding which
they beat the Imperialists near Wolffenbuttel at two several
times, and Torstenson, (who was made General)

being arrived in the Camp, directed his march into silesia,
where he toook Great Glogau with sword in Hand,1642. 
and a great many other places, the chiefest of which
was sweinitz, where he defeated the Imperialists, that
came to its relief, under the Command of Francis Albert
Duke of saxon Lauenburgh, who was killed himself
and 3000 Horse. Afterwards he besieged Brieg, but
was forced to raise that siege, the Imperialists being
superiour in number, who also prevented him from
marching into Bohemia. Wherefore having directed his
March towards the Elbe, and passed that River at Torgaw,
he straightways went to besiege the City of Leipzick. 
But the Imperialists under the Command of the
Arch Duke,Battel fought near Leipzick. 
          and General Piccolomini coming to its relief,
a bloody Battel was fought in the same Plains near
Breitenfeld, where King Gustave Adolf before had obtained
a signal Victory against the Imperialists. In this
Battel the Left Wing of the Imperialists having been
brought into confusion,Oct. 23. the Left Wing of the swedes
underwent the same fate, but the swedes Left Wing
rallying again and falling in the Flank of the Imperialists
Right Wing, they put them to the rout, 5000 being
killed upon the spot, and 4500 taken Prisoners. 
The swedes lost 2000 Men, and had a great many
wounded. After the loss of this Battel Leipzick was
soon forced to surrender, but Freybergh (which was soon
after besieged by Torstenson) defended it self so well,
that the swedes, upon the approach of the Imperial
General Piccolomini, were forced to raise the siege with
the loss of 1500 Men. And the Weirmarian Army under
the Command of the French General Gebrian was
for the most part ruined by the Bavarians. 
        In the mean while Torstenson had received Orders to
March with his Army into Holstein,
         War with Denmark. 
          the swedes provoked
by a great many injuries,1644. having resolved to
turn their Arms against Denmark; which was executed
with great secresie, so that the swedes coming unexpectedly
upon the Danes took the greatest part of Holstein,
beat their Troops in Jutland and shonen, and
ruined their Fleet; made themselves Masters of the
whole Bishoprick of Bremen, and the Isle of Bernholm,
which obliged the Danes to make a disadvantageous

Peace with them at Bromsebtoo given to the swedes
Jempteland and Herndalen, Gothland and Oesel, besides
other advantages. 1645. 
         Torstenson having then made a Truce
with the Elector of saxony marched again into Bohemia,
         Peace with Denmark. 
         
where another Battel was fought near Janowitz
betwixt the Imperialists and swedes, wherein the first
were routed with the loss of 8000 Men, one half of
whom were killed the rest taken Prisoners. The swedes
had 2000 Men killed. The swedes then marched through
Bohemia into Moravia, and from thence into Austria,
where having been joined by Ragozi they were in a fair
way of making greater progresses, if Ragoz, who had
received satisfaction from the Emperour, had not left
the swedish Army, and marched Home with his Forces. 
The French also under the Command of Turenne having
been again routed by the Bavarians, Torstenson marched
back into Bohemia, who having put his Forces into
Winter Quarters near the River of Eger, and growing
very crazy left the supreme Command of the Army to
Wrangel, who finding the Enemy too strong for him thereabouts,
marched further back into Misnia, and from
thence towards the Weser. But having not long after
been joined by Turenne near Gieslen they attacked Augsburgh
which being reinforced with 500 Men, they were
forced to quit the siege upon the approach of the Imperialists,
who also retook several places in the Hereditary
Countries of the Emperour. Not long after Wrangel
also made a Truce with the Elector of Bavaria, which
however lasted not long, the said Elector having upon
the persuasion of the Emperour broke the same a few
months after, and joined his Forces with the Imperialists. 
But Wrangel marching early out of his Winter Quarters,
in conjunction with Turenne,
         1643. pressed so hard upon
the Bavarians that they were forced to retire to saltzburgh,
leaving a great part of the Country to the discretion
of the Allies, where these burnt a great many
Houses, because the Inhabitants refused to pay Contribution. 
About the same time Koningsmark had surprised
the suburbs of Prague,
         July 16. where he had got a prodigious
Booty in the Imperial Palace, and other Noble-Mens
Houses which are all built on that side of the River,
but could not take the City, which was defended

by 12000 Citizens, so that having sent his Forces into
their Winter Quarters thereabouts, whilst Wrangel was
marching into the Ʋpper Palatinate they received the
News of a Peace being concluded at Munster. 
        This Peace had been long in agitation before it was
brought to perfection,Peace made at Munster and Osnabrug. 
          the Imperialists having endeavoured,
after they saw the swedes recover themselves so
bravely after the Battel of Nomingen to persuade them
to a separate Peace without including the Protestant Estates
in Germany. But the swedes having refused these
offers as being neither honourable nor secure, seven
years were spent in the Preliminaries, and these having
been adjusted the Treaty it self was begun at Osnabrug
and Munster, where the Emperours, spanish, and
Dutch Ambassadours, as also those of the most Roman
Catholick Estates, and the Popes Nuncio were Resident,
but in the first the Imperial Ambassadours also, and those
of most of the Protestant Estates were assembled, where
at last a Peace was concluded, by vertue of which
sweden got the Dukedoms of Bremen and Veerden, the
greatest part of Pomerania, the Isle of Rugen, and the
City of Wismar, to hold these Countries in Fief of the
Empire, with all the Priviledges thereunto belonging,
and five Millions of Crowns towards the payment of
their Armies. Besides this they had the Honour of
having been instrumental in re-establishing several German
Princes in their Territories, and setling both the
Quiet and Protestant Religion in Germany. The
War being thus ended to the great Honour of the
swedes, the Queen, who had already then taken a resolution
of surrendring the Crown to her Nephew
Charles Gustave, would willingly have put an end to
the Differences betwixt sweden and Poland, which were
likely to revive again after the Truce expired, but the
Poles were so haughty in their Behaviour, and refractory
in their Transactions that no Peace could be concluded
at that time. Having therefore settled her Affairs
and reserved a certain yearly allowance for her
self during her life, she surrendred the Crown to the
said Charles Gustave her Nephew at the Dyet at Ʋpsal,
         1654. 
where he was Crowned the same day when she resigned
the Government. Jun. 6. 
        
§ 16. Charles Gustave. 
         Charles Gustave, finding the Treasury exhausted,
obtained at the first Dyet from the Estates that
the fourth part of such Crown Lands as had been granted
away since the Reign of Gustave Adolfe, should be
reunited with the Crown, and having again settled the
Military Affairs, which were somewhat decayed since
the last Peace, resolved to force the Poles to an honourable
Peace. The War with Poland renewed. The better to execute his design, he marched
in Person into Poland, where he met with such success,
that after having defeated some that would have
opposed his passage, not only the Polanders, but also the
Lithuanians submitted voluntarily, swearing Allegiance
to him, and John Casimir, their King, was forced to
fly into silesia. But whilst the King of sweden was
marched into Prussia, the Poles, with the assistance of
the House of Austria, having with the same readiness
again forsaken his Interest, were faln upon the swedes
in their Quarters, of whom they killed a great many,
especially in Lithuania, forcing the rest to seek for shelter
in some strong Holds which were in their possession. 
The King having put an end to the differences betwixt
him and the Elector of Brandenburgh concerning Prussia,
in conjunction with the said Elector, marched back
towards Warsaw, where he obtained a signal Victory
over the Poles and Tartars; and being in the beginning
of the next year joined by Bogislaw Radzivil,
         1656. Prince of
Transylvania, would in all likelyhood have humbled the
haughty Poles, if the Danes had not threatened a dangerous
diversion near Home, and actually denounced
War to sweden. 
        This obliged the King to draw his main Army that
way,War with Denmark. 
          where he not only made great progresses both in
Holstein and Bremen; but also by a prodigy scarce to be
believed by Posterity marched over the Ice into the
Island of Tuhnen,
         1658. and from thence to other Islands, and
at last into sealand, where he carried all before him,
which brought the King of Denmark to such a distress,
that he was forced to clap up a sudden Peace at Rocshild,
giving to the swedes schonen, Halland and Bleckingen,
the Isle of Bernholm, besides several other Possessions in
Norway. But this Peace was of no long continuance,

for the King having again conceived a jealousie at the
Danes, Embarked his Forces in Holstein, and under
pretence of going towards Datzick landed in sealand,
and besieged Copenhagen,
         siege of Copenhagen. 
          whilst Wrangel reduced the
strong Fortress of Cronenburgh. But the Danes being
chiefly encouraged by their King's presence defended
themselves bravely, till the Dutch Fleet gave them relief,
which obliged the King after having attempted,
but in vain, to take it by storm, to raise the siege. But
the greatest misfortune befel the swedes in the Island of
Tuhnen,
         Battel in Tuhnen. 
          where being over numbred by the joint Forces
of the Imperialists, Poles, Brandenburghers and Danes,
they were totally routed near Nyborgh,
         1666. their Infantry
being most cut to pieces, and the rest made Prisoners. 
The King being busie in repairing this loss, was seized
with an Epidemical Fever, of which he dyed on the
23. of February. 
        § 17. Charles IX. 
          
         Charles being but five years old when his Father
dyed, the swedes applyed all their care to obtain
an honourable Peace,Peace made with the Poles, May 3. which was concluded with the
Poles in the Monastery called Oliva, near Dantzick,
wherein were also included the Emperour and Elector
of Brandenburgh, and King John Casimir resigned his
pretension to the Crown of sweden, and the Poles to
Livonia. In the same month a Peace was concluded
with Denmark,
         May 23. Peace made with Denmark. 
          much upon the same conditions, which
were agreed on formerly at Rocshild, except that the
Danes kept the Isle of Bornholm, and Druntheim in
Norway. For the rest, the swedes were for preserving
Peace with their Neighbours during the minority of the
King, till having broke off the Triple Alliance made
betwixt them, and the English and Dutch they sided
with France against the Elector of Brandenburgh,
         1674. whom
they pretended, by sending an Army into his Territories,
to draw from the Interest of the Empire. But
this occasioned a heavy War to the King, at the very
beginning of his Reign,The swedes routed by the Elector of Brandenburgh. 
          wherein the Elector having
routed the swedish Army, took all what the swedes were
possessed of in Pomerania, as the Lunenburghers got into
their possession the Dukedoms of Bremen and Veerden,
and the King of Denmark the City of Wismar,
         
and several considerable places in shonen, but the Danes
having at last been routed at two Battels in shonen, the
King after the Treaty of Nimeguen, by a particular Peace
was put again into the possession of his Countries in
Germany, very few excepted, and Denmark was forced
also to restore the places taken from the swedes in
shonen. This Peace having been again settled in sweden,
the King married Ʋlrica Eleanora the present King of
Denmark's sister, since which time the King has chiefly
applied himself to settle his Military Affairs and Revenues,
and to maintain the Peace with his Neighbours. 1678. 
        § 18. The nature and qualification of the swedish Nation. The swedish and Gothick Nation has antiently
been famous for Warlike Archievements, and is very fit
to endure the Fatigues of War; yet were their Military
Affairs in former times but very indifferently ordered,
their chiefest Force consisting in the Boors, till Gustave
and his successours with the assistance of some scotch and
German Officers and souldiers have introduced such a
Discipline as that now they do not stand in so much
need of foreign souldiers, except it be to make up the
number of Men, wherewith they are not overstocked,
especially since the late great Wars. As in most other
Kingdoms of Europe, by reason of the multitude of their
populous Cities, the Estate of the Citizens is the fundamental
part of the state, so is in sweden that of the Boors,
who enjoy more liberty in sweden than in other Kingdoms,
and also send their Deputies to the Dyet, where
their consent is requisite to any new Taxes to be levied
upon the subjects. This Nation loves to shew a great deal of gravity
and reservedness, which if not qualified by conversation
with other Nations, often degenerates into mistrustfulness. 
They generally are apt to think very well of themselves,
and to despise others. They have sufficient Capacity
to attain to the first Principles of any Art or science,
but commonly want Patience to attain to the perfection
of them. Their inclination is not much to Trade
or Handy-work, and therefore Manufacturies are but
little encouraged among them. 
§ 19. Condition of the Country and its strength. The Kingdom of sweden is of a great extent,
but full of great Forests and innumerable Lakes, and the
sea-Coast surrounded with many Rocks. But deeper
into the Country, there are a great many fertile tracts
of Ground, the Forests furnish them with Fuel, and the
Lakes with great store of good Fish, which also contribute
much to the easie transportation of the Native Commodities
from one place to another. The Country produces
Corn sufficient for its Inhabitants, neither is there
any want of Cattel or Horses. sweden produces more
Copper and Iron than any other Kingdom in the World,
and their Mines are fitted by nature for that purpose,
being surrounded with Woods and Rivulets. There is
a silver Mine in Westmanland. Finland brings forth
Pitch, and Tar, and Deal; and Wermeland good store
of Masts. The Native Commodities of sweden are
Copper, Iron, Tar, Pitch, Masts, Boards &c. In lieu
of which, sweden receives from abroad Wine, Brandy,
salt, spices, Cloaths, silk and Woollen stuffs, fine Linnen
Cloath, French Manufactories of all sorts, Furs, Paper
and such like, all which in some years surpasses in
value the Commodities fit for exportation here. To
recompence this, Navigation and Commerce has been
encouraged of late years among the Natives, and several
sorts of Manufactories, whereof those made of Copper,
Iron and Brass would questionless turn to the best
account, if these Artists were duely encouraged to settle
themselves in this Kingdom, Copper and Iron being the
foundation of the swedish Commerce abroad. This
present King has put their Forces both Horse and Foot in
a better Condition than ever they were before, which
are maintained in sweden, with a small charge to the
Crown, the Foot being maintained by the Boors, but
the Horsemen have for the most part some Farms in their
possession belonging to the Crown, the Revenues of
which are their pay. But the King's Guards are paid
out of his Treasury. Formerly the station of the Royal
Navy was at stockholm, but since a new Harbour has
been made in Bleckingen, where the ships may be put
to sea sooner, and with more conveniency. Besides this,
sweden has this advantage, that it is covered on the side

of Norway with inaccessible Rocks, besides the three
strong Fortresses of Bahus, Marstrand and Gothenburgh,
and the swedish and Finland Coasts are so well guarded
by innumerable Islands, that it is very difficult to approach
the shoar. § 20. Neighbours of sweden. 
          As to the Neighbours of sweden, it borders on
the East side upon Muscovy, with whom the swedes in
former times were often at War,Muscovites. but since Finland is
now well covered against them by the Fortresses of
Narva, Kexholm and Noteburgh, and they have learned
by experience that the swedes are better souldiers than
they, there is nothing to be feared from thence. And
since the swedes have no great reason to covet any further
Conquests on that side, they may be taken now for
good Neighbours. Poles. With the Poles the swedes used formerly
to have no difference at all, except when in outrage
that Nation espoused the quarrel of their King concerning
his Title to sweden. But since Charles Gustave
a little humbled their pretensions upon Livonia, as the
swedes have done upon Prussia, the Poles for the future
may in all likelihood prove good Neighbours to sweden. 
         Germany. 
The swedes have had antiently a great Communication
with the Germans, by reason of their Commerce with
the Hanse Towns. But since the swedes have by the
Westphalia Treaty been put into possession of two Provinces
in Germany, they enjoy the same right with the
rest of the Estates, and the King of sweden is now to be
considered as a Member, and not as a Neighbour of the
Empire, whose Interest therefore is to see, that the Westphalia
Treaty be kept in vigour. There is some jealousy
betwixt the swedes and the Elector of Brandenburgh,
about some part of Pomerania, which would else have
fallen to that Elector's share, and besides this, he is obliged
to keep up a constant standing Army against so considerable
a Neighbour, but since sweden has preserved
Brandenburgh and the rest of the Protestant Estates, and
the said Elector has received a triple equivalent for this
loss, it is but reasonable that something of allowance
should be given as to this point especially, since it is not
for the Interest of sweden to make any further Conquests
in Germany. But betwixt the swedes and the House of

         Lunenburgh, there ought to be a good understanding, since
they are able to do one another great service against
Denmark Brandenburgh and the Westphalian Bishops. 
since sweden by making the sea the borders betwixt
them and Denmark,
         Denmark. has put a stop to these troubles
which formerly used to proceed from the too near neighbourhood
of the Danes, and secured their Trade, it ought
not to make any attempt of further Conquests in Denmark,
it being the Interest of most Estates of Europe, to
take care that neither of the two Northern Kings become
sole Master of the sound. Wherefore sweden
ought to endeavour to keep the present limits betwixt
them and Denmark, and to live in amity with those Estates
in Germany, who are jealous of the Neighbourhood
of Denmark. The foundation of the good Correspondency,France. 
betwixt France and sweden was built upon the
common agreement of keeping under the overgrown
Greatness of the House of Austria, but since the case is
now altened, the King of France now pretends to play
the Master over Princes. sweden ought not to assist France
in those Designs which overturn the Westphalian. Treaty,
or are intended against the Protestants in Germany and
Holland. The good understanding betwixt sweden and
Holland is chiefly founded upon this bottom,Holland. that as
sweden cannot be glad to see Holland ruined, so the Hollanders
are obliged to prevent the King of Denmark from
making himself sole Master of the passage of the sound
or the Baltick. 
         England. 
         England has hitherto had so little concern
with those Northern parts, that their greatest Correspondency
has been transacted by way of contemplating
with very little Reality. spain and Portugal. 
         spain is considered by the
swedes as a part of the House of Austria, tho' the swedes
have so far a concern in the spanish Netherlands, as
from their preservation depends the welfare of Holland. 
But the good understanding betwixt sweden and Portugal
depends only from the mutual Commerce of these two
Nation, who else by reason of this great distance can
scarce be serviceable to one another. "
"6","CHAP. I. Of the Ancient Monarchies, and more especially
of the Roman, out of whose Ruines
arose several Kingdoms and states. §. 1. NO Man of Common sense, imagines, that
at the first Propagation of Mankind,The most ancient state of Mankind. there
were such Governments as are among
us at this time. But in those Times each Father,
without being subject to any superiour Power,
governed his Wife, Children and servants, as a sovereign. 
Nay, it seems very probable to me, that even
to the time of the Deluge, there was no Magistracy,
or any Civil Constitution; but that the Government
was lodged only in each Father of his Family. For it
is scarce to be imagined, that such abominable Disorders
could have been introduced, where the Power
of Magistrates and Laws was exercised: And it is observable,
that after once the Rules of Government
were Constituted, we do not find that Mankind in
general did run into the same Enormities, of which
God Almighty was obliged to purge the World by an
Universal Punishment, though the Root of the Evil
was remaining as well after as before the Deluge. It
seems also, that for a considerable time after the Deluge
this Paternal Government continued in the
World. 
§. 2. The Original of Civil societies. But the reason why the Fathers of Families
left this separate way of living, and joyned in a Mutual
civil society, seems to be, That among the Neighbouring
Families, sometimes Quarrels used to arise,
which being often decided by Force, drew along with
them very great Inconveniencies, to prevent which,
it was thought necessary for the Preservation of Peace
and Quietness among Neighbours, to referr the Decision
of such Matters to the Judgment of some of the wisest
and most Considerable among them. After the increase
of Mankind, it was also easily to be observed,
how difficult it would prove for a single Family to defend
it self against the Joint Conspiracy of a malicious
Party, to Oppose which, the Neighbours living so near,
as to be able to assist one another in case of Necessity,
did enter into a society Mutually to defend themselves
against their Common Enemies. That they might do
this with the better success, the Administration of the
whole society was committed to him, who appeared
most Considerable for his Wisdom and Valour. It is
also very Probable that such as by Common Consent
sought out new Habitations, chose a Leader, who
both in their Journey, and in the Country, which they
possessed themselves of, had the chief Direction of Affairs:
And this office of a Judge, Head, or Leader by
degrees degenerated into that sort of Government,
which Aristotle calls Heroical, which is nothing else
but a Democracy under the Authority of one of the
Citizens, who has a Power rather to Advise than to
Command the rest. And this seems to be the most ancient
Form of Republicks: for the Fathers and Rulers of their
Families could not so soon forget their Liberty, as not
to Reserve to themselves a share in the Government by
which their Consent was required to be given unto all
Matters, which were to be decreed in the Name of the
whole society. §. 3. At what time the first states were constituted. But at what time precisely these societies were
first Instituted, and which of them is to be esteemed
the most Ancient, is not easie to be determined; for
though commonly the Assyrian Empire is taken for
the first Monarchy, yet it is not from hence to be concluded,

that the same was the first civil society; since
it is evident that this Empire acquired its Greatness by
swallowing up Lesser states. And those Wars which the
Assyrian Kings waged against other states, do abundantly
testifie, that besides the Assyrian, there were also
other Civil societies even at that time in the World. 
And here is to be observed, that as all human Affairs
do not come immediately to Perfection, so were the
first Institutions of Civil society very simple and imperfect,The first states were very small and imperfect. 
till by degrees the supreme Civil Power, together
with such Laws and Constitutions as were requisite for
the maintaining of a Civil society, were instituted. 
The first commonwealths also were very small, and
their Territories of a very little extent, so that it was
easie for the Citizens to assemble, either to Consult or
to Defend themselves against a Foreign Power. It is
evident out of History, that the deeper you search into
the most ancient Times, the more separate small commonwealths
you will meet withal, out of the Union
of which great Empires in Process of time did arise,
some of those Uniting themselves by common Consent,
others being subdued by the more Powerfull. §. 4. Among these great Empires,The Assyrian Empire. the Assyrian is
commonly reckoned the most Ancient, the reason of
which may probably be, That those Parts were sooner,
and More Inhabited than other places, which being
later possessed had Fewer Inhabitants. Wherefore the
Assyrians might without much difficulty overcome one
small commonwealth after another, and by subduing
some, make way for an Entire Conquest over the
rest, that had not then learned the advantage of a
joint Power and Confederacy. The vast Armies with
which Ninus and semiramis (the first Founders of this
Monarchy) did over-power far distant Nations, make
the common Chronologies very doubtfull: But to settle
this is not to our present purpose. But by what means
the Kings of this vast Empire did bridle the Conquered
Nations, ought to be remembred, Two of them being
most remarkable. By what means this Empire was maintained. The First was, That they intending
to imprint an Extraordinary Character of their Persons
into the Minds of the People, they always kept themselves

very close in their Palaces, and being seldom to
be seen by any but their nearest servants, they never
gave Answer to their subjects Petitions but by them. 
Whereby they possessed the People that they were
much above the Common Rank of Mankind. The
second was, That every Year they used to draw a
certain number of souldiers out of each Province, and
these being Quartered in and about the place of their
Residence, and Commanded by such a one as was
thought most faithfull, these Forces struck Terrour
both into the subjects at Home and the neighbouring
Nations Abroad. This Army was again Disbanded
every year, and another drawn out of the Provinces,
that the General by the Authority he had with the
soldiers, might not be in a condition to Invade the
Empire. Its Fall. The Ruin of this Empire under sardanapalus,
is not so much to be ascribed to his Effeminacy,
as to this, That the Kings allowed too much Power
to the Governours of Provinces of so vast an extent. 
These grew at last too Powerfull for the Kings themselves,
who being lulled asleep by Voluptuousness (the
effects of Peace and Plenty) did not, as they used to do
formerly, by great Actions endeavour to maintain their
Authority among the People. Out of the Ruins of
the Assyrian Empire two new Kingdoms were erected;
Arbactes taking upon himself the sovereignty of Media,
where he was Governour, as the Lord Lieutenant
of Babylon did the same in his Province, both which
were afterwards re-united under the Persian Monarchy. §. 5. Cyrus the first Founder of the Persian Empire,The Persian Empire. 
did, besides what formerly belonged to Media, and Babylon,
also Conquer a great part of the Lesser Asia. This
Prince, besides other remarkable Constitutions, did wisely
institute this, as a most necessary one to preserve the
Peace of his Empire;By what means it was maintained. That in all Provinces, where he
sent his Lords Lieutenants, he Constituted Governours
of the Fortresses chosen out of the Commons, who being
not under the Jurisdiction of the Lords Lieutenants,
had their dependence immediately on the King. These
therefore living in continual Jealousies, served as a Bridle

to one another. The Lords Lieutenants, without the
Assistance of the Governours of the Fortresses, were
not in a Capacity to Mutiny against the King, who
not only Observed all their Actions, but also frequently
Informed the King concerning their Behaviour. From
the Governours of the Fortresses nothing was to be feared,
because, being of Mean Condition and a very Limited
Power, they were not capable of making any great
Factions, or drawing any considerable Party after them. 
Cambyses annexed Egypt to the Persian Empire. But
whenever the Kings of Persia did undertake to extend
their Conquests further, it always proved fruitless. Cambyses
did in vain Attack the Aethiopians, as Darius
Hydaspes did the scythians. And Xerxes was shamefully
beaten by the Greeks: But the following Kings,
Artaxerxes Longimanus, Darius Nothus, and Artaxerxes
Mnemon, did Manage their Affairs with more
Wisdom against the Greeks, whom they did not Attack;
but leaving them at rest, they quickly saw Intestine
Wars kindled amongst themselves; wherein they
so well knew how to play their Game, that by always
affording Assistance to the weaker side, they rather
protracted than finished these intestine Wars, till the
Greeks, quite tired and exhausted, were obliged to accept
of such Conditions of Peace as were projected by
the Persians, whereby each City being declared free
and independent of one another, Greece was disabled
hereafter to undertake any thing of Moment. Notwithstanding
Macedon, an obscure Nation of Greece,
proved the Ruin of the Persian Monarchy, through
a defect of Policy in their Kings, in not early Opposing
the Growing Power of Philip, by raising Powerfull Enemies
in Greece, against him and his son Alexander,
(which for great summs of Money they might easily
have done,) and thus have cut out so much Work for
these two Warlike Princes at Home, that they
could not have had leisure so much as to have entred
on the thoughts of Invading Persia: In the same manner,
as formerly the Persians had obliged Agesilaus
quickly to return into Greece. But being over secure
in their own strength, and despising Others, they drew
upon themselves their own Destruction. 
§. 6. Greece. 
         Greece was in ancient times divided into a
great many petty commonwealths, every one of
these being governed by its own Laws. Among those
in Process of time, Athens grew most famous, whose
Citizens for Ingenuity, Eloquence, and the knowledge
of Arts and science, surpassed all the rest; their Glory
increased exceedingly after they had signalized themselves
so bravely against the Persians. After this, by
adding of the Harbour of Pyreum to their City, they
made it very commodious for shipping, and acquired
such vast Riches, that by their naval strength they
subdued the Isles of the Aegean sea and the Coasts of
the Lesser Asia. But being puffed up with their good
success, they drew upon themselves the hatred of their
Allies: and after they once attempted to be sole Masters
of Greece, the Peloponnesians, headed by the spartans
(who especially envied the Athenians) united together
to chastise the insolence of Athens. Yet the
Athenians behaved themselves so bravely, that the
War was carried on for a considerable time with near equal
success, till at last being vanquished in a Battle
in sicily, they also lost their whole Fleet on the Coast
of Thrace; then the Lacedaemonians becoming Masters
of Athens constituted thirty Governours, who tyrannized
most cruelly over such of the Citizens of Athens
as survived the storming of their City; yet Thrasibulus
having expelled the same with the assistance of
some of the banished Athenians, restored the City to
its former Liberty. After this, though the Athenians
did recover themselves a little, yet were they never able
to arrive at the former Grandeur of their commonwealth,
and being afterwards too forward in
making head against Philip, they were severely chastised
by him. It was therefore the immoderate Ambition
of the Athenians, and their desire of conquering
more than they were able to defend, which occasioned
their Ruin. For the number of the Citizens of Athens
did not exceed ten thousand, and they rarely receiving
others as Citizens among them, great Cities and Provinces,
could not be kept in obedience by such a number,
and with one unfortunate Blow their whole power
was struck down without Recovery. And considering

that such Cities are better fitted for their own Defence,
than making Conquests upon others, it is more
adviseable for them to mind the advantage of their
own Trade, than to inter-meddle too much in foreign
Affairs, and rather to keep safe their own Walls, than
to invade their Neighbours. sparta. Next to Athens, Lacedaemon
was famous in Greece, whose Citizens by the
constitutions and rigorous Discipline introduced by Lycurgus,
seemed to be most fitly qualified for warlike
Atchievements. This City having not any powerfull
Neighbour to contest withall, was strong enough to
defend its Liberty against the Neighbouring Commonwealths. 
And the spartans, as long as they, according
to their Laws and Institution, despised Riches, had no
great occasion to invade others: But as soon as they
began to aim at higher matters, they found by experience,
that it was a quite different case to conquer
Kingdoms, than to defend their own City. For having
had the good Fortune of subduing Athens, they
fell into the same folly which had been the Ruin of the
Athenians, and were not only for conquering the Asiatick
sea Coasts, but also under the Conduct of Agesilaus
they invaded Persia. But it was easie for the
King of Persia to find out means to chastise their Insolence,
who caused a diversion to be made by the Greeks,
that envied the success of the spartans, so that they
were quickly obliged to recall Agesilaus to defend themselves
at home. Not long after their Fleet being beaten
by Conon, Epaminondas defeated their Army by
Land in the Battle of Leuctra, whereby they were so
weakened, that they were scarce able to defend their
own Walls. Next to these two Cities, Thebes was for
a while famous, through the Valour and Wisdom of
Epaminondas, who so well knew how to head his Countrymen,
that they humbled the spartans, and as long
as he lived, were the most flourishing state of Greece. 
But after his death, this City returned to its former
state, and making head against Philip, was severely
chastised by hir•, and quite destroyed by his son Alexander. 
        
§. 7. Macedon. 
         Macedon was before the times of Philip an inconsiderable
Kingdom, and so exposed to the Incursions
of its Neighbours, that it was scarce able to defend
it self, this Nation being then esteemed the most despicable
of Greece. But by the Military Virtue of
two Kings, this Nation did show it self so considerable,
that it conquered a great part of the World. The circumstances
wherein the neighbouring Nations of Macedon
were at that time,The Politick Conduct and great Actions of Philip. 
          and the good Conduct of
Philip, whereby he so settled the Kingdom at home,
that it quickly became the chiefest in all Greece, gave
the first opportunity to lay the Foundation of this
Monarchy. For on one side it had for its Neighbours
the Thracians, Triballians, and Illyrians, very barbarous
Nations; these were easily kept in awe by a neighbouring,
wise and brave King. On the other side,
was Greece and its Cities, which, though they were
much fallen from their ancient Glory, yet, were all together
still too hard for the Macedonians. Against
those he made use of this Artifice, That by setting
them together by the Ears among themselves, he so
weakened them with intestine Wars, that they were
afterwards not able to hold out long against him. And
because Philip used only to attack one of those Cities
at a time, and the rest were not forward enough unanimously
to hinder his growing Greatness, he was upon
a sudden, before they were aware of it grown too
strong and potent for them all. Philip seemed particularly
endowed with great qualifications for this enterprize:
For besides the Vivacity of his spirit, he was
pushed on by an extraordinary Ambition to make himself
famous by great Actions. What real Vertues were
wanting in him, he endeavoured to supply with pretending
to the same; wherefore tho' he did nothing without
a fair Pretence, yet did he never stick at any thing,
provided he could obtain his ends, and was never sparing
in Promises or Oaths, if he thought he could thereby
deceive such as he intended to overcome. He was
an absolute Master of his Passions, and knew how to
keep his Counsels secret, how to set Friends together
by the Ears, and by pretending Friendships to both
Parties, to deceive them by vain hopes. He being also

very Eloquent, knew how to insinuate himself with
every body; and as for Money, he made no other use
of it, than to advance his designs. He was a most
experienced Warriour, and had made the Macedonians
so excellent souldiers, that the Macedonian
Phalanx, first invented by him, was terrible, even to
the Romans. And, because he was always at the Head
of his Armies, continually exercised his souldiers, and
punctually paid them, there were no better souldiers,
in his days, than the Macedonians. Being arrived to
this Greatness, so that he was chosen by the common
consent of Greece their General against the Persians;
and being busie in making preparations for this expedition,
he was barbarously murthered, leaving his son
Alexander the glory of pursuing it. §. 8. Alexander the Great. There is scarce in all History to be read of
an Expedition more famous than that of Alexander
the Great, wherein he, with thirty odd thousand Men,
conquered so vast and potent Kingdoms, and by his
victorious Arms extended his Empire from the Hellespont
to the Indies. If we enquire into the causes of
so uncommon and happy progresses; it is undeniable
that, besides the Providence of God Almighty, who
has put bounds to all Kingdoms upon Earth, the incomparable
Valour of Alexander himself had a great
share in the same; who having an Army of chosen
Men, fell upon his Enemy's Army with such swiftness
and vigour, that it was impossible for any new levied
Forces, though never so numerous, to resist him. Yet
Darius committed a grand mistake, when he offered
Battel to Alexander; it being evident, that the Persians
never were equal to the Greeks in Pitched Battels. 
Besides this, the Persians having lived for a considerable
time in Peace, had few experienced souldiers
among them; so that the greater the number was of
such undisciplined souldiers, the sooner were they
brought into disorder at the time of Battel. Darius
was ignorant of that great Art of protracting the War,
and by posting himself advantageously, and cutting
off the Provisions from his Enemies, to take off the
edge of fierce Alexander. And because he had neglected

to give him a diversion at home with the assistance
of the Greeks, who envied his Greatness, no other
Event could reasonably be expected, than what
afterwards followed. §. 9. He dies young. But the untimely Death of Alexander robbed
both him and his young Children of the fruits of his
Victories. For these, being young, lost not only their
Father's Kingdom, but also the fatal Wars carried on
after his Death betwixt his Generals, brought the conquered
Nations under great Calamities, who else would
have been in hopes to have changed their Kings for
a much better and greater Prince. But that it seemed
was next to an impossibility, that these so suddenly
conquered Countries should so soon be united in one
Kingdom. since a firm Union betwixt so many Nations
could not be established without a singular Prudence
of their supream Head, and a considerable time. 
We find also that a sudden Greatness is rarely lasting,
there being no less ability required to maintain, than
to acquire a thing of this nature. The Conquests
therefore of Alexander being of so vast an extent, that
the small number of his Macedonians was by no means
sufficient to keep them in awe; and to make those Provinces
dependent on the Macedonian Empire, there
was no other way to maintain such vast Conquests,
than to treat the conquered Nations in the same manner
with his native subjects, and not to oblige them
to recede from their ancient Laws and Customs, or to
turn Macedonians, but rather for him to turn Persian,
that the conquered might not be sensible of any other
change, but what they found in the Person of their
King. Alexander understood this very well; wherefore
he not only used himself to the Persian Customs
and Habit, but also married the deceased King's Daughter,
and had a Persian Guard about him. Those Writers,
who reprehend Alexander's Conduct in this matter,
only discover their own indiscretion. But to settle
a right understanding betwixt the Conquerours
and Conquered, did require a considerable time; to
effect which, Alexander seemed to be the fittest Man
in the World, as being endowed with a more than

ordinary Valour, Magnanimity, Liberality and Authority. 
If he had left a son behind him not unworthy
of so great a Father, the Persian Throne would
questionless have been entailed upon his Family. §. 10. Great Troubles after the Death of Alexander. 
          The Death of Alexander the Great was
the occasion of long and bloody Wars; For the Army,
puffed up with the Glory of its great Actions,
esteemed no body worthy of the supream Command;
And the Generals refusing to obey one another, were
grown too potent to live as private persons. 'Tis time
Arideus had the name of King; but this poor Man
wanted both Authority and Power to bridle the Ambition
of so many proud and great Men. Wherefore
all spurred on by their hopes, some of obtaining the
whole Empire, some of getting a considerable share,
they waged a most bloody and long War among themselves,
till their number was reduced to a few, from a
great many, who first pretended to the Empire. Five
of them took upon themselves the Title of Kings, and
the sovereign Dominion of their Provinces, viz. Cassander,
Lysimachus, Antigonus, seleucus and Ptolemy. 
But only the three last transmitted their Kingdoms
to their Families. There were then no more than
three Kingdoms remaining in the power of the Macedonians;
viz. That of syria, Egypt and Macedon;
That part of the Persian Empire which lay Easterly
beyond the River Euphrates, being become a vast new
Kingdom under the name of the Parthian Empire. 
The above-mentioned three Kingdoms were afterwards
swallowed up by the Romans,
         The Fall of the Macedonian Empire. and the Kingdom
of Macedon was the first, as lying nearest unto
Italy. For the Romans, after having subdued all
Italy, began to extend their Conquests beyond the
seas; and perceiving that Philip, an active King, bid
fair for the Conquest of all Greece; they did not think
it advisable to let him grow more Powerfull, he being
so near to them, that in time he might easily prove
troublesome to Italy. They entring therefore into a
League with the same Cities of Greece, which were
Attacked by Philip, under that pretence made War
upon Philip; and having driven him back into Macedon,
         
restored Liberty to all Greece. By which means
the Romans at the same time divided their strength,
and gained their Affections; at length they Conquered
Perseus, and with him the Kingdom of Macedon:
Then they turned their Arms against syria, and took
from Antiochus the Great, all that part of Asia which
extends as far as Mount Taurus. And though this
Kingdom did hold out for a while after, yet being
miserably torn to pieces by the Dissentions, which were
risen in the Royal Family, it surrendred it self to Tigranes,
King of Armenia. But he being Conquered
by Pompey, the Whole was made a Province of the
Roman Empire. Egypt at last could not escape the
Hands of the Romans, after the Emperour Augustus had
defeated Cleopatra and her Galant Mark Antony. 
        § 11. Before we come to Rome,
         Carthage. we must say
something of Carthage. This City having long contested
with Rome for the superiority, so that the Roman
Government did not think it self well secured, as
long as this City was in Being. This City, though it
was rather fitted for Trade than War; yet having acquired
vast Riches by its Traffick, and being vastly
encreased in Power and Inhabitants, forced not only
the next adjacent Countries in Africa to pay them
Tribute, but also sent vast Armies into sicily, sardinia
and spain. This occasioned the Wars betwixt
them and the Romans; the two First they maintained
with extraordinary Resolution and Valour, but in
the Third they were brought to utter Destruction. 
If they had avoided to meddle with the Roman Affairs,
they might in all probability have been able for
a great while to defend their Liberty. Ambition therefore
was the chief Cause of their Ruin, since the Constitution
of their Government was such, as being Adapted
for Trade, did not require any great Possessions,
except a few Lands for the use of their Citizens, and
some sea-Ports in spain and sicily, for conveniency of
Commerce and shipping. But the Conquests of large
Countries were more hurtfull than profitable to them. 
For those Generals who Commanded their Armies abroad,
proved at last dangerous to them, thinking it

below themselves after so much Glory and vast Riches
obtained, to be put in the same Rank with their Fellow
Citizens. The Inhabitants besides, of this City,
were not so well fitted for Land-service; so that they
being obliged to fill up their Armies with Mercenary
souldiers, collected out of several Nations, these were
a vast and certain Charge to them, the hopes of the
Benefit remaining uncertain. And besides this, their
Faith was very inconstant, and the Conquered places
could scarce be trusted to those, whose Faith might easily
be bought by Money. After their first War with
the Romans, they Experienced almost to their utter
Ruin, how dangerous it is to wage War altogether
with Foreign and Mercenary souldiers. And therefore
they could not possibly hold out against the Romans,
who fought with a much greater Constancy for
their Native Country, than these Foreign Mercenaries
did for their Pay. 'Twas a Capital Errour in the Carthaginians,
that they did not take care in time, so to
Establish their Power at sea, that they needed not to
have feared any thing from the Romans that way: But
after they had once let the Romans become Masters at
sea, they could not but expect them one time or another
at their City-gates. At the time when Hannibal
had such prodigious success against the Romans, it proved
also a fatal Neglect in them, that they did not
timely send fresh supplies to Re-inforce him, so that
he might have prosecuted the War to the Destruction
of Rome. For after they had once given leisure to
the Romans, to recollect themselves, they, conscious
of their former danger, never rested till they had rased
Carthage to the ground. §. 12. Rome a Warlike City. It is worth the while to trace the Commonwealth
of Rome back to its Original, because none ever
yet Equalled it in Power and Greatness, and because
young students are first Entred and best Read in the
Roman History. This City was perfectly made for
War, from whence the first had her Rise, and afterwards
her Fall. Its first Inhabitants were a sorry
Rabble of Indigent People, the very Dregs of Italy,
being ignorant of what belonged to Commerce, and

not expert in any Handy-craft's Trade. For the carrying
on of the first, Rome was not Commodiously
situated; and the Latter was at that time unknown
in Italy. That small parcel of Ground which
at first they had possessed themselves of, was not sufficient
to maintain a considerable Number of People;
nor was there any vacant Ground in the Neighbourhood,
which could be Tilled for their use. If therefore
they would not always remain Beggars, nothing
was left them but their swords, wherewith to cut out
their Fortune. And truly Rome was nothing else but
a Den of Wolves, and its Inhabitants, like Wolves,
always thirsting after their Neighbour's Goods and
Blood, living by continual Robberies. It was then
necessary for a City, under these Circumstances, to keep
up a constant stock of Valiant Citizens. To effect
this the better,Bywhat means Rome became so populous. 
         Romulus commanded, that no Child
should be killed, except such as were very Deformed;
which barbarous Custom was also then very common
among the Grecians. Besides this, he ordered that all
slaves at Rome, together with their Liberty, should
have the Privilege of the City, from whom afterwards
descended great Families, their Posterity being ambitious
by great Deeds, to Efface the Memory of their
base Original. But above all, one thing did mightily
contribute towards the Increase of Rome, that Romulus
did not suffer the Men to be put to the sword, in
such places, as were taken by force by the Romans,
nor would let them be sold for slaves; but receiving
them into Rome, granted them the same Privileges
with the rest of the Citizens. The Roman Writers
give this for one reason, why Athens and sparta could
not so long maintain their Conquests, as Rome did;
since they seldom Naturalized strangers; whereas Romulus
frequently used to receive the same as Citizens
of Rome in the Evening, with whom he had fought in
the Morning. For War cannot be carried on without
a good stock of Men; nor can Conquests be maintained
without a considerable Number of Valiant souldiers,
upon whose Faith the Government can rely in case of
an Attack. But that the Conquered places might not
be left destitute of Inhabitants, and Rome might not

be filled up with too much Rabble, they used only
to Transplant the best and richest Men of the Conquered
places to Rome, filling up their places with the
poorest of the Roman Citizens; who setling a continual
good Correspondence betwixt the Conquered and the
Romans, served also for a Garrison in these places. By
these means the most Valiant and Richest Inhabitants
of the Neighbouring Countries were drawn to Rome,
and the poorest among the Romans obtained thereby,
in those places, large Possessions. But although Necessity
gave an Edge to the Roman Valour, 'twas not
that alone that made them so War-like a People; for
the Courage of their Kings, who instructed them in
Military Affairs, and hardned them to Dangers, had a
great share in it; though, the thing rightly considered,
it is not always adviseable, to lay the Foundation
of a state upon Military Constitutions; since the
Changes of War are uncertain, and then it is not for
the Quiet of any state that Martial Tempers should
prevail too much in it. Wherefore Peaceable times
did never agree with the Romans; and as soon as they
were freed from the Danger of Foreign Enemies, they
sheathed their swords in each other's Bowels. §. 13. There were also other things worth our
Observation,several other Military Institutions. which did greatly advance the Military
Affairs of Rome. One of the chiefest was, That their
King servius Tullius had ordered, that only the most
able and wealthy Citizens should do service as souldiers,
and Equip themselves either with light Arms or
compleat Armour, according to their Ability: And,
whereas formerly every body, without distinction, was
obliged to serve the Publick in the Wars at his own
Charge; the poorer sort afterwards were never made
use of, but upon Extraordinary Occasions. And
though Riches do not make a Man the more Valiant,
yet was it but reasonable, since every body was obliged
to serve without Pay, that those, who were scarce
able to maintain themselves, should be spared as much
as could be: But besides this, their Wealth was a
Pledge of their Fidelity. For he that has nothing to
lose but his Life, carries all along with him, and has

no such strict Obligation to face Death; besides, that
he may easily be brought to desert his own Party, if
he meets with a prospect of a better fortune among
the Enemies. On the contrary, a wealthy Man fights
with more Zeal for the Publick Interest, because in defending
That, he secures his own, and is not likely to
betray his Trust; For if he deserts, he leaves his Possessions
behind him, with uncertain hopes of a recompence
of his Treachery from the Enemy. And, though
this Custom grew out of fashion under the Emperours,
yet, in lieu of that, they always kept part of
their Arrears behind, to assure themselves of their Fidelity;
and these were never paid, till they were dismissed. 
It is also remarkable, that, though the Romans
have been often signally beaten in the Field, yet did
they never despair or accept of any disadvantageous
Conditions of Peace, except what they did with Porsenae,
and the Gauls called the Terrour; to the first
they were fain to give Hostages, upon condition, that
they should not make any Iron-work, except what
was requisite for Tilling the Ground. Of which
shamefull Peace, the Roman Historians have cautiously
avoided to speak in their Writings. And the Gauls
were within an Inch of having put a period to the very
Being of Rome, if they had not been bought off
with Money, to Raise the siege of the Capitol, reduced
to the utmost extremity by Famine. For what
is related, that Camillus coming up just at the time of
the weighing out of the Gold, and drove the Gauls
from the Capitol, some look upon as a fabulous Relation. 
Upon all other occasions they have always born
their publick Misfortunes with an extraordinary Constancy. 
For, notwithstanding that Hannibal in the
second Punick War had reduced them to the last Extremity,
yet was not a word of Peace mentioned at
Rome. And when their Generals by Claudius and
Numantia had agreed upon shamefull Conditions
with the Enemies, they chose rather to deliver up the
Generals to the Enemies, than Ratifie the Treaty. 
They used also commonly to have but a small regard,
and rarely to redeem such as were made Prisoners among
them, to teach thereby the Roman souldiers, to

expect no deliverance but from their own swords. As
this Custom did oblige the souldiers to fight till the
last, so did their Constancy stand them in great stead
among other Nations. For he that shows himself
once fearfull of his Enemy, must expect to be Attackt
by him, as often as opportunity presents it self. §. 14. Of the Religion of the Romans. 
          It is also worth the while to touch a little
upon the Religion of the Ancient Romans, which,
though it was derived from the Greeks, yet the Romans
knew much better how to Accommodate it to
the advantage of their state. It was therefore from
the very beginning a constant Rule at Rome, not to
begin any publick Affairs of moment, without good
Indications or Presages: Because that the Event of
things is commonly supposed to happen according to
the Approbation of God. And therefore such as think
themselves assured of the good Will of God, undertake
and effect things with a greater Courage. These Indications
were commonly taken from Birds. Which
being a very ancient superstition, which took its Rise
from an Opinion of the Heathens, that the Gods having
their place of Residence immediately above the
Region of the Air, did make use of the Creatures of
the next adjoyning Element for their Interpreters. 
These Indications also were thought particularly usefull,
because the same were at hand at all times, and
the Motions and Chirpings of the Birds might be variously
interpreted according to the Exigency of the
Times, and the Affairs of the state. The cunning
Augrs or sooth-sayers made use of these Predictions
from the flight of Birds, to inspire the ignorant Multitude
either with Hopes or Despair, Valour or Fear,
according as it seemed most suitable and convenient to
the publick Affairs. Wherefore Cato the Elder, who
was an Augur himself, did not stick to say; He did
wonder, how one Augur, meeting another, could forbear
laughing, because their science was built upon so slight
a foundation. What the Romans did call Religion,
was chiefly instituted for the benefit of the state, that
thereby they might the better be able to Rule the
Minds of the People, according to the Conveniencies

and Exigencies of the state; quite in another manner,
than the Christian Religion does, which is instituted
for the benefit of the soul, and the future Happiness
of Mankind. Wherefore there were no certain
Heads or Articles of Religion among the Romans,
whence the People might be instructed concerning the
Being and Will of God, or how they might regulate
their Passions and Actions so as to please God: But
all was involved in outward Ceremonies; viz. What
sort of sacrifices was to be made, what Holy-days and
Publick Games were to be kept, &c. For the rest, the
Priests were unconcerned, as to what the People did
believe or not believe of Divine Matters; or, whether
after this Life the Vertuous and Wicked were to expect
Rewards according to their several deserts; or,
whether the souls perished together with the Bodies. 
For we see, that the Heathens have spoken very dubiously
concerning these Matters, and the wisest of them
have taken these things for Inventions wherewith to
keep the People in awe. But in their Ceremonies they
were most exact, performing the same with great
pomp and outward show, and rarely admitting of the
least alteration to be made in the same. All this was
instituted to please the humour of the Multitude,
which is most moved with those things, which dazle
the Eyes, and strike strongly on the senses. Wherefore
their Temples and sacrifices were not only extraordinary
Magnificent, but the Priests also were chosen
out of the most Noble Families, which served to increase
the Reverence of the People, that commonly
judges of the Value of things, according to the quality
of such as are employed about them. Yet besides this,
there was another Mystery in it. For, because they
made use of their Religion only as an Instrument of
state, to make the People pliable to the Intentions of
their Rulers; it was by all means necessary, that such
Priests were made use of, as understood the Interest of
the state, and did themselves also sit at the Helm of
the commonwealth. On the contrary, if the meaner
sort had been employed as Priests, they might easily,
out of Ambition, have, with the assistance of the People,
raised a Faction contrary to the Governours, since

the Multitude commonly depends on those of whose
sanctity they have an Opinion; or else out of ignorance
of the publick Affairs and the present Exigencies
they might chance to influence the People in another
manner, than was consistent with the present state
of Affairs. They prevented also by this way, that the
Priests could not form a particular Estate in the commonwealth,
and thereby either cause a mischievous
Division, or else strive to get the Power into their
own hands. §. 15. The Expulsion of their Kings, and the Erection of a new Form of Government. After Rome had been governed for Two
hundred forty and two Years by Kings, another Form
of Government was introduced, sextus Tarquin having
at that time ravished Lucretia. Whether Junius
Brutus had sufficient reason, upon this account, to expell
the King, may very well admit of Dispute. For
on one side the Fact was most abominable, and of
such a nature, that a brave Man would rather venture
at any thing, than bear such an affront. And there
are a great many Examples, that Princes, who, to satisfie
their brutish Lusts, have Violated the Chastity of
their subject's Wives and Daughters, and thereby lost
both their Lives and Crowns. But on the other hand,
it is to be considered, that a Fact, though never so
Criminal, committed by a son, without the Knowledge
and Consent of his Father, ought not to be prejudicial
to the Father and Family; much less could it
be a pretence to depose a King from a Throne, which
he lawfully possessed; Especially, since to take Vengeance
of Criminals does belong only to the King,
and not the subjects. And Brutus and Collatinus
would have had reason to complain, after the King had
denied them just satisfaction for the Fact committed
by his son, or if he had in any ways approved of the
same. But it is commonly observed, that in Revolutions
things are seldom carried according to the New form of
the Rules of Justice. And as there is commonly some
injustice committed at the first settlement of a new
Form of Government; so Ambition and Envy, covered
with Pretences of the Faults and Male-Administration
of the Prince, are the true Motives of Dethroning

the same. But not to insist further upon this, it
is certain that Kingly Government could not be durable
at Rome; For such states as are comprehended
in one great City are more fit for an Aristocratical or
Democratical Form of Government; whereas a Monarchy
is fittest to be erected in Kingdoms, where the
subjects are dispersed in a considerable Tract and Extent
of Land. The true Reason of this is, That Mankind
in general, politically considered, is like wild unruly
Creatures, ready upon all occasions to shake off
the Bridle of Civil Obedience, as often as Matters do
not suit with its humours. Besides, this Man cannot
be kept in Obedience without the assistance of Men. 
From whence it may rationally be concluded, why a
King, who Commands only over one great populous
City, is immediately in danger of losing all, as soon as
his subjects are disgusted at him, or another can insinuate
himself into their favour, except he is fortified
with a strong Guard of Foreigners, and a considerable
Fort; though these Remedies are very odious, and
oftentimes very uncertain. For when in such a Government
the Prince comes to be odious, the Hatred
is quickly communicated to all his subjects, as living
close together, and having consequently an opportunity
of uniting themselves easily against him. 
But where the subjects of a Prince live at a distance
from one another, it is easie for him to keep so many
of them inclined to his side, as are sufficient to suppress
the mutinous Party. Wherefore also they are
not so much to be feared, as being not able to meet
so soon, and to unite themselves in one Body. But it
is more especially very dangerous to Command over
subjects living in one place, of a fiery Temper, and
exercised in Arms. For Common sense tells us, that
he who will controul another, ought to have more
force than him. In the mean while, this is most certain,
that this Alteration of the Government mainly
contributed towards the Encrease of Rome; it being
not credible, that under the Monarchical Government
it could have arrived to that Greatness; partly, because
the Kings would have been obliged for their own
security to suppress, in some measure, the Martial spirit

of their Citizens; partly, because the Negligence
or Unskilfulness of some Kings must needs have proved
disadvantageous to the commonwealth. §. 16. Above all,Reasons of the fall of the Roman Greatness. it is worth our Consideration,
by what means the Roman Empire, which extended
it self over so considerable a part of the World, was
destroyed, and became a prey to the Northern Nations,
after it had been broken by its own Intestine
Troubles. The Causes of which we will enquire into
from their first beginning. The People of Rome then
being naturally of a fierce and martial spirit, and enclosed
together within the Walls of one City, their
Kings had no way left to secure their Obedience, but
by gaining their Affections with the gentleness and
moderation of their Government, since they had not
sufficient Power to balance the Forces of so vast a City. 
Wherefore the six first Kings kept the People in Obedience,
rather by their good Inclinations than Fear. 
But as soon as Tarquin the Proud began to oppress
the People with new Impositions, whereby he had so
alienated the Hearts of his subjects from him; it was
easie for Brutus, under pretext of the Fact committed
upon Lucretia, to stir up the discontented People, and
to shut the City-gates against the King. But as all
sudden Changes of Government,The Defects of the Roman Commonwealth. that are carried on
before things have been maturely considered, and all
Emergencies provided against, are commonly accompanied
with great Defects: so also was this at Rome,
where some things were admitted, and others left undone;
not so much because they conduced to the advantage
and safety of the state, but because the present
Juncture of Affairs would not suffer them to be
otherwise. There were also many Over-sights committed
in the beginning, which left a Gap open for future
Evils and Troubles. It seems to be evident, that
Brutus and his Associates, after they had expelled Tarquin,
did intend to introduce an Aristocratical Form
of Government: For it is scarce credible that they,
being Noble-men, with the peril of their Lives should
have expelled Tarquin on purpose to subject themselves
to the Government of the Common people;
but because no Wise man is willing to exchange his

present condition with another, without hopes of amending
the same: Therefore the chief Authors of
this Revolution were obliged, not only to render the
Kingly Government odious to the People, but also by
Mildness and Concessions to make the People in love
with the New Government. For if the Common people
had not been made sensible of the benefit they received
from the Government of the Nobility, they
might easily have opened the Gates again to Tarquin. 
Wherefore Valerius Papicola did strive to please the People,
especially in letting down the Rods or Fasces (the
Ensigns of Authority) before them, and allowing Appeals
to the People, as a tacit Confession that the supreme
Power of Rome did belong to them. It was by
all means requisite, if the Noble-men did intend to
maintain the newly acquired Authority, to have a particular
care of these two things. First, To take heed
that they did not exasperate the Common people
with their Pride; And, secondly, To find Means to
maintain the poorer sort, that they might not be
forced to seek for Remedies against their Poverty and
Debts by disturbing the Publick. But neither of them
were sufficiently regarded by the Nobility. There being
at that time no written Laws at Rome, and the
Nobility being in possession of all publick Offices, Justice
was oftentimes administred according to Favour
and Affection, the poorer sort being often, though unjustly,
oppressed by the more Powerfull. And because
the Citizens were obliged to serve in the Wars
at their own Charge at that time, when little was to
be got, they were thereby miserably exhausted; so
that they had no other remedy left them but to borrow
Money from the Richer sort. These used such as
were not able to satisfie their Creditors in so barbarous
a manner, by Imprisoning, laying of them in Chains,
and other Cruelties, that the Commons, quite put into
despair, unanimously retired out of the City; neither
could they be persuaded to return, before the senate
had agreed to constitute Magistrates, called Tribunes
of the People, who were to protect the Commons
against the Power of the Nobility. 
§. 17. Two distinct Bodies in Rome. 
          This was the Original and Cause of the
Division of the Romans into two Factions; viz. One
of the Nobility, and the Other two Parties of the Common
people: The continual Jealousies of which did
afterwards minister perpetual fewel for Civil Dissentions. 
It seemed at first sight but equitable and of no
great consequence, that the Commons might have
for their Heads some, who could upon all occasions
protect them against the Nobility: But in this the
Nobles did commit a grand Errour, that they allowed
to the Common people, which made the major
part of the City, a protection independent of the senate;
making thereby the Body of the Commonwealth
as it were double-headed. Factious Tribunes. For the Tribunes,
spurred on by Ambition, and the Hatred, which is
common in the Plebeians against the Nobility, were
not satisfied with affording their Protection to the
People against the Nobility; but also were always
endeavouring to be equal in Power, nay even to surpass
the senate in Authority. And first by their continual
Contests they obtained a Privilege for the Commons
to intermarry with the Nobles; Afterwards they
forced also the Nobility to consent that one of the
Consuls should be chosen out of the Commonalty. 
They took upon themselves the Power of a Negative
Voice, so as that no Decree of the senate could pass
into a Law without their consent, nay and even without
the consent of the senate to make Laws, and to
exercise the other Acts of sovereign Authority. The
senate, 'tis true, to divert and employ the People,
continually engaged them in one War or another,
that they might not have leisure to contrive any
thing against the Government. This, though it did
very well for a while, and the Power and Territories
of Rome were mightily thereby encreased, yet did arise
from thence some other inconveniencies, which
did not a little contribute towards the indisposition
of the state. For whereas the conquered Lands ought
to have been given to the poorer sort of the people,
whereby the City would have been freed from a great
many needy Citizens; the Nobles, under pretence of
Farming the same, took them into their own possession;

and what with these Revenues, and the great
Booty which fell in the Wars almost all to their
share, as being Commanders in Chief, the Riches of
the Nobles encreased prodigiously; whereas a great
many of the Plebeians had scarce wherewithall to
maintain themselves. The Commonalty being for
these Reasons extreamly dissatisfied with the senate,
there were not wanting some of the Nobility, and others,
of an ambitious spirit, who having taken distaste
at some Transactions of the senate, did, under
pretence of maintaining the Liberties of the People,
make a considerable Party among them, though, in
effect, their chief aim was, with the assistance of the
Plebeians, to carry on their ambitious designs. Those
being by force opposed by the senate, it came quickly
to a Civil War, and they sheathed their swords in
each other's Bowels. §. 18. In the mean time,Citizens too powerfull. partly by the vast Increase
of the Roman Empire, partly by Inadvertency
of the senate, another Evil had taken root; viz. That
vast and rich Provinces, together with great Armies,
were committed to the Government of some of the
Roman Citizens, and that for several years. From
which, as it created in them an aversion to a private
life, so it gave an opportunity to have whole Armies
at their Devotion. It is not adviseable for any state
whatsoever to let any of its Citizens mount to that
degree of Power. For he that has a potent Army at
his Devotion, will scarce be able to resist the temptation,
but will be apt to attempt to make himself sovereign. 
It is evident that the Ambition and great
Power of Marius, sulla, Pompey and Caesar did spur
them on, by Intestine Wars, to suppress the Liberty of
their native Country; and after Rome was quite broken
by them, to introduce an alteration in its Government. 
There was scarce any remedy left against this
Evil, after the Citizens had once laid aside the respect
due to the senate, and the souldiers had tasted the
sweets of the Booty got by Civil Commotions. Wherefore
this commonwealth at the very time when it
was arrived to the pitch of its Greatness, it returned again

to a Monarchy, but not of the best kind, where
the Army exercised sovereign Authority. The Constitution of the Roman Monarchy. 
         Augustus
was the first Founder of this Monarchy, which he by
his wife and long Reign, seemed to have established
pretty well: And truly this new introduced form of
Government, did for a while promise very fair, since
Augustus assumed only the Title of Prince, and maintaining
the senate and the rest of the great Officers in
their stations, took upon himself no more than the
administration of Military Affairs. But in effect, this
Monarchy was not founded so much upon the consent
of the senate and People, as upon the Power of the
souldiery, by whose assistance it was introduced and
maintained. And because the ancient Nobility could
not brook to be commanded by one single person,
and was always for recovering its former Liberty, the
Emperours left no stone unturned either to diminish,
or quite to extinguish the splendour of the ancient
Nobility; so that within the space of 200 Years, very
few were left, in whose places new Favourites of the
Emperours were created, who were willing to submit
themselves to their Commands. §. 19. But this Monarchy being founded upon the
souldiery,The Roman Monarchy could not be of a long continuance. could not be of a long continuance; for as
soon as the souldiers had once learned this secret, that
they being the supporters of the Monarchy, could
dispose of the Empire at pleasure, and that the senate
and People were now empty Names; the Emperours
were not only obliged with double Pay and great
Presents to purchase their Favour; but they also began
to kill such Emperours as were not pleasing to
them, and to fill up their room with such as could obtain
their Favour. And because one Army did claim
the same Prerogative as well as the other, not only
the Pretorian Bands, but also other Armies, which
were on the Frontiers, undertook to do the same. 
Hence came nothing but Misery and Confusion in the
Roman Empire, the Life of each Emperour depending
on the Will of the covetous and unruly souldiers, so
that no Emperour was assured to leave the Empire to
his Posterity. Oftentimes the bravest Princes were

murthered, and in their room others set up of the
meanest Rank and Capacity. Oftentimes two or
more were declared Emperours, who used to make
horrid slaughters among the Citizens in deciding their
Titles to the Empire. And this was the reason why
not only very few of the ancient Emperours died a
natural death, but also the Power of this vast Empire,
was diminished to that degree by these intestine Wars,
that it did appear no otherwise than a Body without
its Nerves. Constantine the Great did also hasten its
fall, when he transferred the Imperial Court from
Rome to Constantinople, and sent away the Veterane
Legions which guarded the Frontiers of the Empire,
along the Danube and the Rhine, to the Easterly
Parts, whereby the Western Provinces, destitute of
their Guards, became a prey to other Nations. Besides
this, Theodosius divided the Empire betwixt his
two sons, giving to Arcadius the Eastern, to Honorius
the Western parts; which division did not a little
contribute towards the destruction of the Empire. 
The Western Parts became a prey to the Germans and
Goths, who about that time came in prodigious numbers,
to change their poor Habitations for the pleasant
and rich Provinces of the Romans. England the Romans
left of their own accord, as being not in a capacity
to defend it against the scots, and having occasion
for their Troops to defend France. spain fell to
the share of the West-Goths. The Vandals settled
themselves in Africa. The Goths, Burgundians and
Francks divided France betwixt them. Rhaetia and
Noricum was conquered by the suevians and Bavarians. 
A great part of Pannonia and Illyricum was possested
by the Huns. The Goths settled a Kingdom in
Italy▪
          and did not think Rome worthy to make it
the place of Residence of the Gothick Kings. §. 20. Though the Western parts of the Roman
Empire tell to the share of Foreign Nations, yet the
Eastern Provinces,〈…〉 who•e Capital City was Constanti
           ••le▪
         
remained for a great many hundred years after▪
         〈◊〉 
         •his Eastern Empire was neither in Power nor
splendour to be compared to the Ancient Roman
         
Empire. And Agathias the Vth. says, That whereas
heretofore the Roman Forces consisted of 645000 Men,
the same did amount in the times of Justinian scarce to
150000. 'Tis true, under the Reign of this Justinian,
the Empire began to recover something of its former
Power, Belisarius having destroyed the Empire
of the Vandals in Africa, as Narses did that of the
Goths in Italy, because these Nations were grown Effeminate,
and overcome with the deliciousness of a
plentifull Country: Yet did it again decrease by degrees,
the neighbouring Nations taking away one
piece after another, the Emperours were partly in
fault themselves, some of them being sunk in pleasures,
and grown quite effeminate; others in continual
Divisions, destroying each other. One part was
subdued by the Bulgarians. The saracens conquered
syria, Palestine, Egypt, Cilicia, and other neighbouring
Countries, and ra•aging the rest, besieged Constantinople;
which City was once taken by Count
Baldwin of Flanders, but his Forces were obliged to
quit it not long after. The City also of Trebisond,
with the neighbouring Countries withdrawing from
the Obedience of the rest of the Empire, set up an
Emperour of their own choosing. At last the Turks
entirely subdued this Empire, who did not only conquer
the saracens, but also afterwards swallowed up
the Remnants of the Eastern Empire of Constantinople;
Greece having before withdrawn it self from
the Obedience of the Emperours, was governed by its
own petty Princes; making, thereby, the Conquest
of the Turks over them the easier; till, at last, the
City of Constantinople being taken by storm by the
Turks,
         Anno 1453. was afterwards made the place of Residence of
the Ottoman Emperours. "
"7","CHAP. II. Of the Kingdom of spain. sPain was in ancient Times divided into a great
many states,The ancient state of spain. 
          independent of one another, which
was at that time the condition of most other Countries
of Europe. But, by reason of this Division,
this otherwise War-like Nation was very instrumental
to its being conquered by foreign Enemies. To this
may be added, That the spaniards did want good and
understanding Generals, under whose Conduct they
might easily have resisted the Power of their Enemies. 
For not to mention how the Celts passed out of Gaul
into the next adjacent parts of spain, who being mixt
with the Iberians▪
          were from thenceforward called
Celtiberians; neither how the Rhodians built Roses,
the Citizens of Zante saguntum, the Phoenicians Cadiz,
Malaga and other Cities, the Carthaginians, above
the rest, immediately after the first Punick War
with the Romans, began to conquer a great part of
spain. Wherefore in the second Punick War the Romans
did at first send their Forces into spain, where
they fought so long with the Carthaginians, till at
last, scipio, afterwards sir-named the African, made a
great part of it a Roman Province; the other parts
were subdued by degrees, till Augustus at last entirely
subduing the Cantabrians, who live next to the Pyrenean
Mountains, joined all spain to the Roman Empire,
under whose Protection it was peaceably governed
for a considerable time, except that the spaniards
now and then were drawn in to take a part in
the Civil Wars among the Romans. 
        §. 2. West Goths conquer spain. But the Western parts of the Roman Empire
declining, the Vandals, suevians, Alani and silingi
made an inrode into spain,
         410. and after many bloody
Battels fought, divided it betwixt them; which Conquests
nevertheless they did not enjoy long; for the
Vandals passing over into Africa, the Alani were quite

routed by the suevians, who having also subdued the
silingi, were in a fair way of becoming Masters of all
spain, if they had not been prevented by the West
Goths; who, after they had under the Conduct of
their King Alarick, ransacked Italy and Rome it self,
settled themselves upon the Borders lying betwixt
spain and France, making Narbonne the seat of their
Kings, who at first had under their Jurisdiction Catalonia
and Languedock, but soon after extended their
Power over other Provinces of spain. Among these
was particularly renowned their King Euric, who
took from the Romans all what was left them in spain,
except Gallicia, which remained under the Power of
the suevians: He also conquered several Provinces in
France. But Clodoveus, King of the Francks, having
defeated the son of Euric, retook from the Goths,
what they had conquered before in France, under the
Reign of Agila and Athanagildas; the Romans,
         554. who
had before rescued Africa from the hands of the Vandals,
retook a part of spain, but were chaced from
thence, for the most part, under the Reign of Levigildis,
who also did quite root out the suevians in
Gallicia. Under the Reign of his son Recaredus,
         572. the
Empire of the Goths was arrived to its highest pitch of
greatness,586. as comprehending not only some neighbouring
Provinces of France, and a part of Mauritania,
but also all spain, except a small part possessed as
yet by the Romans; from whence they were quite
chased afterwards by King suinthila. King Wamba
subdued the Gothick Rebels in France with great success,646. 
and beat the Fleet of the saracens,
         677. who much
infested those seas; but under Witiza the Gothick
Empire begun to decline from their ancient Valour,The Ruine of the Gothick Empire in spain. 
         
the Goths being much degenerated, till under the
Reign of Roderic it was quite extinguished. The
King himself contributed greatly to its sudden downfall;
for having ravished a certain Court Lady called
Cava, the Daughter of Count Julian, Governour of
that part of Mauritania which belonged to the Goths,
as also over that tract of spain which lies near the
streights of Gibral•ar; he to revenge himself for this
affront, first stirred up a great many of the King's

subjects against him, and afterwards persuaded the
saracens to pass out of Africa over into spain. These
to try their Fortune, first passed over with a small
number, but quickly encreasing by continual supplies
of Men sent from home, they vanquished such Forces
as Roderic sent in hast against them. After this success
the treacherous Julian understanding that Roderic did
intend to bring into the Field the whole Forces of his
Kingdom,713. which consisted of 100000 Men, brought
more saracens over into spain, who being joined with
the rest, did in a most memorable Battle intirely rout
this Multitude of unexercised and ill armed souldiers,
who were surprized to see one of their own party called
Oppas, with the Troops under his Command, went
over to the Enemy, and fell into their Flanck, together
with the Forces of Julian. Thus all was given
over for lost, and in this one Battle fell the whole
Power and splendour of the Goths, which had been
famous in spain for three hundred Years, Roderic himself
being killed in the flight,714. so that the Goths being
without a Head were quite dispersed,The saracens c•nquer spain. and all the great
Cities, partly by force of Arms, partly upon Articles,
fell into the Hands of the Enemy within the space of
three Years. Only Asturia, Biscay, a part of Gallicia
and some Countries next adjacent to the Pyrenean
Mountains remained under the Goths, rather, because
the Enemies did not think it worth their while to
drive them from these Mountainous places, than that
the Goths trusted to their own strength to defend
themselves against them. Into these parts also retired
such Christians as had escaped the sword of the Enemies. 
But all the rest of spain was inhabited by the
saracens and Jews. 
        §. 3. Kings in Oviedo. 
          To free spain from this Tyranny, was first
undertaken by Pelagius,
         Pelagius. who (as 'twas said) was descended
from the Race of the Gothick Kings. This
Man being chosen King,726. did recollect the remaining
Forces of this unfortunate Nation; and having brought
together an Army, obtained a signal Victory against
the Moors; and in the mean while that the saracens
were weakening their strength in France, took from

them the City of Leon, and several others. His son
Favila,
         Favila. who succeeded him, did nothing worth mentioning. 
But Alfonso the Catholick re-took several
Places from the Moors,
         Alfonso I. and reigned till the Year 757. 737. 
Whose son Favila also Valiantly defended his Kingdom,Favila. 
vanquishing the Moors in a great Battle. He
was killed in the Year 768:Aurelius. But his successor Aurelius
made a shamefull Peace with the Moors, by virtue
of which he was obliged to give them a yearly
Tribute of a certain Number of Virgins. He died in
the Year 774. silo. His successor silo did also nothing
worth mentioning, and died in the Year 783. After him
reigned Alfonso,
         Alfonsus I▪
          the son of Favila, against whom Mauregatus
taking up Arms, forced him out of the Kingdom;
who, to settle himself the better in the Empire,
craved assistance from the Moors, promising them a
yearly Tribute of 50 Noble Virgins, and as many others. 
He died in the Year 788. His successor Veremundus
did nothing Praise-worthy,Veremundus. except that he recalled
Alfonso, sir-named the Chaste; who refusing to
pay the Tribute of the Virgins to the Moors,
         791. gave
them several signal Defeats: But having no Children,
he made an agreement with Charles the Great, that
he should assist him in driving the Moors out of spain;
in recompence of which, he was to be his Heir in the
Kingdom of spain. Charles therefore sent his son
Bernard with a Puissant Army into spain, but the
spaniards not liking the agreement, as being not willing
to be under the Command of the French, arose
unanimously, and falling upon the French near Ronceval;
just as they were entring into spain, entirely
routed them; in which Battle the famous Rowland
was slain. Thus it is related by the spanish Historians,
but the French do not agree with them in the relation. 
Alfonso died in the Year 844, whose successor
Ramirus most gloriously ushered the spanish Liberty. Ramirus,
For the Moors demanding the Tribute according to
the agreement made with Mauregatus, he defeated
them in a great Battle, but could not take from them
many of their strong Holds, being with-held partly
by Intestine Commotions, partly by an Inrode the
Normans made upon him. He died in the Year 851. 

After him succeeded his son Ordonius,
         Ordonius I. who reigned
with great applause; he obtained a Victory over the
Moors, and took some of their strong Holds. He died
in the Year 862,Alfonso III. whose son and successor Alfonso, sirnamed
the Great, fortunately overcame the Rebels at
home, and the Moors abroad. But by laying too
heavy Impositions upon the People, he drew the hatred
of a great many upon himself, and was therefore
robbed of the Crown by his son Garsias. 
         Garsias. This King
Valiantly attackt the Moors,
         910. but died soon after. 
His Brother also was Victorious against the Moors▪
         
         913. 
transferring the seat of the spanish Kings from Oviedo
to Leon. 
         The Origin of the Kingdoms of Navarre and Arragon. 
          He died in the Year 923. But besides this
Kingdom of Oviedo, there arose several other Governments
in spain. For Garsias semenus erected a new
Kingdom in Navarre; and Aznar, son of Eudo, Duke
of Aquitain, having taken several Places from the
Moors, took upon himself, with consent of the before-mentioned
Garsias, the Title of Earl of Arragon. 
Lewis also, son of Charles the Great, taking Barcelona,
constituted a Governour there, whose Name
was Bernard, a Frenchman, from whom descended the
Earls of Barcelona. About the time also of the above-mentioned
Kings there were several Earls or Governours
of Old Castile, who acknowledged the foresaid
Kings for their soveraigns. These Earls being once
suspected by King Ordonius, he called them together;
who appearing, were all killed by his Order. Wherefore
the Old Castilians, under the Reign of his son
Favila,
         Favila II. a cruel Tyrant, with-drawing themselves from
the Kingdom of Leon, chose two Governours, under
the Name of Judges, who were to administer all Civil
and Military Affairs. But this Form of Government
did not last long among them. §. 4. Alfonso IV. After Favila Alphonso the IVth. obtained the
Kingdom, under whose Reign Ferdinand Gonsalvo,
Earl of Castile, performed great things both against
the Moors, and sanctius Abareus, and his son Garsias,
Kings of Navarre, whom he vanquished. But Alfonso
himself being unfit to Govern the Kingdom, surrendred
it to his Brother Ramirus;
         Ramirus II. who, with the assistance
of the before-mentioned Ferdinand,
         931. beat the

         Moors in several Places. He died in the Year 950, and
was succeeded by his son Ordonius,
         Ordonius III a Valiant Prince;
but did not Reign long, leaving the Kingdom to his
Brother sanctius Crassus. 
         sanctius. He was Banished by Ordonius,
sir-named the Wicked;
         955. but soon restored by
the help of the Moors. It is said that by certain Articles
made betwixt sanctius and Ferdinand, Earl of
Castile,
         965. it was agreed, that Castile after that time
should not be obliged to acknowledge any dependance
on the Kings of Leon. 
         Ramirus III. He was succeeded by Ramirus,
who,967. in his Minority, was under Womens tuition;
and when grown up, proved very useless to the
Publick. For, under his Reign, partly by civil Commotions,
partly by the In-roads made by the Moors,
the Kingdom was considerably weakened, and in great
danger of losing more, several Places being taken from
the Christians. 
         Veremund II. Under Veremund II. also, the Moors
did considerable mischief in those Parts,982. taking and
plundering, besides a great many others, the City of
Leon; to which Misfortunes the civil Commotions
did greatly contribute. But at last Veremund entring
into a Confederacy with the King of Navarre, and Garsias,
Earl of Castile, forced the Moors out of his Kingdom. 
Him succeeded his son Alfonso V. Alfonso V. under whose
Reign there were great Intestine Commotions in Castile,
         999. 
whereby the Moors were encouraged to attack it with
such vigour, that they over-threw Garsias, and took
him Prisoner, whose son sanctius revenged himself afterwards
upon the Moors. After this, great Dissentions
being arisen among the Moors, their Empire was
divided into several Parts, each Governour of its Province
assuming the Name of King. Alfonso succeeded
his son Veremund III. Veremund III under whose Reign there
happened a great Revolution in spain. For Garsias,
Earl of Castile,
         1025. being upon the point of being married
to the King's sister at Leon, was there barbarously
murthered by some of his Vassals. Castile therefore
falling to sanctius, King of Navarre, who had married
the sister of Garsias, he took upon him the Title
of King of Castile. This sanctius, sir-named Major,
also waged War against Veremund,
         Castile made a Kingdom. who had no Children,
taking from him, by force of Arms, a considerable

part of the Kingdom. Whereupon a Peace was
concluded, whereby it was agreed, that sanctius should
keep what he had taken before, but that his son Ferdinand
should Marry sanctia, the sister of Veremund,
she being Heiress to her Brother, and to succeed him
in the Kingdom of Leon. In this manner was Leon,
Navarre and Castile,
         sanctius II. United in one House: But in
the mean while that sanctius Major was in the Field
against the Moors,
         Major. a great Misfortune happened at
Home. He had particularly recommended to the
Care of his Queen a very fine Horse, which Garsias,
her Eldest son, had a mind to have, and would have
obtained it from the Mother, if the Master of the Horse
had not opposed it, telling them, that his Father would
be greatly displeased at it. This denial wrought so
upon the son, that he accused his Mother of committing
Adultery with the Master of the Horse. The
Matter being examined, the King's Natural son, Ramirus,
profered to justifie the Innocency of the Queen
in a Duel with Garsias, and the King being uncertain
what to do, a Priest did at last enforce the Confession
of the Calumny cast upon the Queen from Garsias;
whereupon Garsias being declared incapable of
succeeding his Father in Castile, which did belong to
him by his Mother's side, and Ramirus obtained the succession
in the Kingdom of Arragon as a recompence of
his Fidelity. This sanctius Major died in the Year 1035. §. 5. Thus all the Provinces of spain,
         The pernici•us Division of spain. 
          which were
possessed by the Christians, being joined in one House,
it seemed an easie matter to root out the Moors, divided
among themselves, and to restore spain to its
former state, if the same had remained under one Head. 
But the division made by sanctius Major occasioned
most bloody and pernicious Wars. This before-mentioned
sanctius had four sons: To the Eldest Garsias,
he left Navarre and Biscay; to Ferdinand, Castile; to
Gonsalvo, suprarbe and Ripagorsa; and to Ramirus
his Natural son, Arragon, giving to each of them the
Title of King. These being all ambitious to be equal
in Power and Greatness to their Father, and thinking
their Bounds too narrow, fell quickly together by the

Ears. For whilest Garsias was gone in Pilgrimage to
Rome, Ramirus endeavoured to make himself Master
of Navarre; but the other returning home, •hased
him out of Arragon. There arose also a War betwixt
Ferdinand of Castile and his Brother-in-law Veremund▪
         
King of Leon; wherein the latter being slain in Battle,
Ferdinand became Master of Leon, which did by
Right of succession belong to him. 1038. He also took from
the Moors a great part of Portugal. After the Death
of Gonsalvo, the Third son of sanctius Major, Ramirus
made himself Master of his Territories, and endeavoured
also to recover, by force of Arms, Arragon from
the King of Navarre. 
         1045. Not long after Ferdinand of
Castile, and Garsias of Navarre, waged War together
about a certain Tract of Ground,1053. wherein Garsias was
slain in a Battle. By his Death Ramirus got an opportunity
of recovering Arragon. Ferdinand, sir-named
the Great, died in the Year 1065, dividing the
Empire, to the great detriment of spain, among his
three sons. The Eldest sanctius had Castile, Alfonso,
Leon, Garsias Gallicia, and a part of Portugal, with
the Titles of Kings. 
         sanctius III. 
         sanctius waged War with Ramirus
of Arragon,
         1067. whom he slew in a Battle, but was
beaten back again by sanctius, son of Ramirus, and
the King of Navarre. Afterward having driven Alfonso
out of his Territories, and taken Garsias Prisoner,
he took possession of the Territories belonging to his
Brothers, but was slain in the siege of Camora, which
City he endeavoured to take from his sister. Then Alfonso
his Brother,Alfonso VI. who had hitherto dwelt with the
Moorish King of Toledo, made himself Master of Castile
and Leon. 
         1073. And took from the Moors, besides
some other Places, the City of Toledo, which was in
those days esteemed impregnable. 1085. But the Moors in
spain having received fresh Re-inforcements out of
Africa, got new Courage, and falling upon the Christians,
defeated them in two Battles, till Alfonso got
an entire Victory over them, obliging the Moorish
King of Corduba to pay him a yearly Tribute. Nevertheless
he was afterwards again over-thrown in a
Battle fought with the Moors, where he lost his only
son, sanctius, whose Death he revenged soon after

upon them. He died in the Year 1109. Ʋrraca his
Daughter was Heiress to the Kingdom, she being Married
to Alfonso King of Arragon;
         Alfonso VII. Which Marriage,
under pretence of too near a Consanguinity and Adultery
committed by the Queen, was afterwards dissolved
again. Alfonso VIII. But, because Alfonso would nevertheless keep
Castile as the Dowry of the Queen, it caused great Intestine
Wars and Divisions. For Alfonso VIII. son of
Ʋrraca by Raymond of Burgundy, her first Husband,
who was come out of France to assist her Father in the
Wars against the Moors, was proclaimed King of Castile,
in the mean while that Alfonso of Arragon was
busied in taking, besides some other Places, the City of
saragossa from the Moors. 
         1118. At last a Peace was concluded
betwixt Arragon and Castile. 
         1122. Afterwards Alfonso
of Castile made War against the Moors with great
success, taking from them divers Places of Note. But
Alfonso of Arragon being slain in a Battle,1134. fought with
the Moors, and leaving no Children behind him, those
of Navarre chose for their King Garsias, who was of
the Race of their former Kings: But the Arragonians
conferred the Crown upon Ramirus, Brother to the
deceased King, who had been a Monk. Alfonso of Castile,
in Opposition to both, pretending to have a
Right to these Kingdoms, conquered a great part of
them, causing himself, with consent of Pope Innocent II. 
who was supposed to do it in spite to the German Emperours,
to be proclaimed Emperour of spain. But
this difference was also at last composed, it being agreed
that Ramirus should give his only Daughter,
together with the Kingdom, to Raymond Earl of Barcelona,
by which means Catalonia and Arragon were
United;1137. then Alfonso entring into a Confederacy with
the Kings of Navarre and Arragon, Attacked again
the Moors, taking from them the City of Almeria,
which in those days was a great sea-port and Harbour
for Privateers. Raymond took from the Moors Tortosa,
Lerida, and other strong Holds. Alfonso died in
the Year 1157. §. 6. sanctius IV. The same Alfonso (though spain had suffered
sufficiently by its being divided into so many Governments)

left to his son sanctius, Castile; to Ferdinand,
Leon and Gallicia. sanctius, who did nothing, that
is remarkable, except that he beat twice those of Navarre,
died in the Year 1158,Alfonso IX. leaving his son Alfonso
IX. a Child of four years of Age. During the time
of his Minority, there were great Disturbances in Castile,
occasioned partly by the Divisions among the
Nobility, partly by the Wars with Ferdinando of Leon,
and sanctius of Navarre, who took several Places
from the Castilians. But coming to his riper years,
he did extricate himself, though not without great
difficulty, out of those Troubles. In the War against
the Moors, who always kept the spanish Kings in Exercise,
he suffered extreamly, so that he was obliged
to make a Truce with them, because the Kings of
Navarre and Leon at the same time fell upon him. 
At last there was a Confederacy made betwixt these
Kings, with a certain agreement, how such Places
should be disposed of as should be taken from the
Moors. In the Year 1210, a most Memorable Expedition
was undertaken against the Moors, where presented
themselves a great many Foreigners, who came
to signalize themselves; but a great many of them
being soon tired out, returned home. At that time
was fought the famous Battle of Lasa, where 200000
Moors being slain, they lost all their strength. In
this Battle sanctius King of Navarre, breaking first
through a Chain which surrounded the Moorish Army,
he afterwards bore a Chain with an Emerald in his
shield. In this War was taken from the Moors, besides
other Places, the City of Calatrava. The King
of Leon took Alcantara. Alfonso died in the Year 1214,
leaving behind him his son Henry,
         Henry. whose Minority occasioned
great disturbances in the Kingdom; he died
without Issue in the Year 1217. He had two sisters,
the Eldest Blanch was Married to Lewis VIII. son of
Philip Augustus, King of France: The second, Berengaria,
was Married to Alfonso, King of Leon. The
Crown, by Right of succession, did belong to the Eldest,
and her Heirs: But out of a hatred the states
bore to strangers, they conferred the Kingdom upon
Ferdinand,
         Ferdinandus sanctus. sir-named the Holy, son of Berengaria, who

with all speed imaginable, possessed himself of it, before
he could be prevented by his Father, surmounting
all the difficulties which were raised against him,
partly by his Father, partly by some of the Nobility. 
It is related by some, That Blanch was not the eldest
sister, but that some of the Castilian Noblemen did
dispute the right of Berengaria to the Crown, because
the Pope had declared her marriage with Alfonso void,
and their Children illegitimate, as being too near in
Bloud. 1230. By the death of Alfonso, Leon and Castile
were reunited under Ferdinand, at what time the
Moors suffered extreamly in their Affairs. 1230. King James
of Arragon took from them Majorca, in the Year
1232. Minorca in the Year 1234. Yvica in the
Year 1238. The City and Kingdom of Valencia. 
Ferdinand took from them, besides other places, in
the Year 1230, Merida and Badajoz. In the Year
1236,1240. the City and Kingdom of Corduba: Murcia
surrendered it self to the protection of Castile. In
the Year 1243,1248. 
         Jaen, sevile, and the greatest part
of Andalusia. But whilst he was making Preparations
to carry the War into Africa, he died in the
Year 1252. §. 7. Alfonso X. The History of the next following Years is
full of Troubles and Divisions. Alfonso, 'tis true,
was famous in foreign Countries for his Wisdom and
great skill in Astronomy, so that it is reported of him,
that he used to say, That if God would have advised
with him at the time of the Creation of the World, the
World should have been made more uniform; yet he
was unfortunate at home, and hated by his subjects. 
The first occasion of which was, that he being desirous
to fill his Treasury, which was exhausted, he caused
the current Coin to be diminished, which enhanced the
price of every thing, and whilst to prevent this, he
set certain rates on all Commodities,1256. which occasioned
a general scarcity of all things, the people not being
willing to sell at his rates. He was by some of the Electors
chosen Roman Emperour, but because his Children
were then very young, and great Divisions arose
among his Nobles, he delaied for a great many Years

to go thither, and to receive the Imperial Crown, till
in the Year 1275, a fancy took him all on a sudden,
to go and take possession of the Empire, though Rudolf
of Habsburgh was already got into the Imperial
Throne. But his Journey was ended in Provence, he
returning from thence home by the persuasion of the
Pope, who afterwards excommunicated him, and obliged
him also to renounce the Title of Emperour. 
After the death of Ferdinand, his eldest son, sanctius,
the younger Brother, did aim at the succession, tho
Ferdinand had left Children behind him. This raised
a Jealousie betwixt the Father and son, who rose in
open Rebellion against his Father, being assisted by
the major part of the states, which Commotion however
ceased with the death of Alfonso. 
         1284. Under the
Reign of this King many Battels were fought against
the Moors with various success. sanctius V. In the Year also 1282
happened the sicilian Vespers,The sicilian Vespers. by which means Peter
King of Arragon obtained the Kingdom of sicily, he
having before a pretence to it, as having married Constantia
the Daughter of Manfred. Against this sanctius
the son of Ferdinand, his elder Brother, raised several
disturbances, which he overcame all by his Wisdom:
he dyed in the Year 1295. During the time of
the Minority of his son Ferdinand IV. Ferdinand IV the Kingdom
of Castile was overwhelmed with trouble. After he
came to Age, he undertook an Expedition against the
Moors, taking from them Gibraltar, and died in the
flower of his Age. 1312. Under the Reign of this King
James King of Arragon was presented with the Kingdom
of sardinia,
         1297. by the Pope, who pretended to have
a right of disposing of it; and those of Pisa being
then in possession of the same, were afterwards beaten
out by the Arragonians. The Minority also of Alfonso
XI. Alfonso XI. was full of troubles. At that time the Moors
had again received a great Reinforcement out of Africa,
         1324. 
the Castilians nevertheless obtained a most signal
Victory over them in the Year 1340, in which Battel,
'tis said 200000 were slain on the side of the Moors,
and but only 25000 spaniards. At that time Alzira
was taken, and a Peace concluded with the King of
Granada, under condition that he should be tributary

to Castile. 
         1350. This King died in the siege of Gibraltar,
which he had lost before. His son Pieter, sirnamed
The Cruel,
         Peter the Cruel. reigned very tyrannically. He
drew the hatred of most of his subjects upon himself
by parting from his Queen Blanch, whom he afterwards,
tho Innocent, for the sake of a Concubine,
caused to be murthered. This occasioned a Plot against
him, which he suppressed with a great deal of
Bloudshed. In the mean while a War arose betwixt
him and Pieter IV. King of Arragon, who assisted the
Rebels in Castile, who had set up for their King, Henry
the King's Brother, begotten on a Concubine called
Eleonora Gusman: With him also joined a great many
French Voluntiers; so that falling upon Pieter of
Castile,
         1366. he forced him to flee into Aquitain. But he
having raised there a considerable Army, returned into
spain, defeated Henry, and obliged him to flee into
France, but did not desist from his Tyranny,
whereby he quite lost the Affection of his subjects:
And Henry having gathered another Army in France
returned into Castile; where being assisted by the Castilians
he vanquished Pieter, and in the flight killed
him with his own Hands. 1369. 
        §. 8. Henry II. Out of the Race of this Henry II. sirnamed
The Bastard, sprang afterwards Princes who proved
very mischievous to spain. Henry himself did at first
labour under great difficulties, the neighbouring Nations
attacking him every where, yet he surmounted
them, and at last made Peace with them all. But
the Favour of his Nobles he bought with Money. He
died in the year 1379. John II. His son John endeavoured to
obtain the Crown of Portugal, of Ferdinand its King,
whose Daughter he had married. But the Portugueses,
out of a hatred against the Castilians, set up
for their King, John natural son to Pieter King of
Portugal, who maintained himself against the Castilians,
routing them near to Aliunbaret; which Victory
the Portugueses mightily boast of in their Histories. 
Castile was at that time in great danger, the English
siding with the Portugueses, under the Duke of Lancaster,
who having married Constantia, the Daughter

of Pieter sirnamed The Cruel, pretended to the right
of that Crown, bearing also the Title and Arms:
But the business was at last composed, by marrying
the Daughter of the English Duke to the Prince of
Castile; after which also a Peace was concluded with
Portugal. 
         1390. 
         John died by a fall from his Horse. His
son Henry III. Henry III. was a sickly Prince, under whose Minority
great Divisions arose in the Kingdom. During
the time of his Reign he did nothing remarkable, except
that he restored the Revenues which the Nobles
had alienated from the Crown. He died in the
Year 1407,John II. leaving behind him John II. a Child of
two Months old. The tuition of this Prince was, besides
his Mother, committed to Ferdinand his Uncle,
to whom the states did offer the Kingdom, which he
generously refusing to accept of, he obtained afterwards
the Crown of Arragon. This King being under
the tuition of his Mother grown very Effeminate,
only addicted to Voluptuousness, having no Genius
nor inclination for publick Business, committed the
whole management to his Favourite Alvarez de Luna,
an ambitious Man, which occasioned great Jealousies
in his Nobles against him. This King taking his
Favourite's part against the Nobility, an open War ensued
betwixt them, the Rebels being headed by his
own son, and the City of Toledo declared against the
King. At last the King being tired with the many Inconveniencies,
cut this Favourite's Head off;145•. but died
himself in the Year next following. Under the Reign
of this King a War broke out betwixt the spaniards
and those of Granada, wherein the first signalized
themselves to their advantage. In the Year 1420
King Alfonso of Arragon was adopted by Joan Queen
of Naples; but a difference arising betwixt Joan and
Alfonso, she declared the said Adoption void and null,
receiving in his stead Lewis Duke of Anjou; which
afterwards occasioned bloody Wars betwixt France
and spain: Yet Alfonso at last kept the upper hand,
making himself Master of Naples,
         1442. and leaving the
same to his natural son Ferdinand. In the Kingdom
of Castile succeeded John his son Henry IV. Henry IV. the scandal
to the spanish Nation. He being incapable of begetting

Children, to take away this suspicion, hired
one Bertrand Corva, who for this service was made
Earl of Ledesma, to lie with the Queen, who having
brought forth a Daughter called Joan, Henry caused
her to be proclaimed Heiress to the Crown. What
confirmed this the more was, that the Queen afterwards
had another Bastard begotten by another person. 
To remove this shame, and to exclude Joan
from the succession of the Crown, the Nobles of spain
entered into an Association; and putting the Image of
Henry upon a scaffold, they there formally accused
him, and afterwards, having taken off his Ornaments,
threw it from the scaffold, at the same time proclaiming
Alfonso, Brother of Henry, their King. From
hence arose most pernicious intestine Wars which ended
in bloudy Battels. During these troubles Alfonso
died: About the same time,1468. 
         Ferdinand son of John II. 
King of Arragon, whom his Father had declared King
of sicily, propsed a Marriage with Isabella, Henry's
sister, to whom the rebellious Castilians had offered
the Crown, and forced Henry to confirm the right of
Isabella to the Crown; whereupon the Nuptials were
celebrated,1469. but privately: Yet would Henry, by making
this Concession void, have afterwards set up again
the Title of Joan, whom he had promised in
marriage to Charles Duke of Aquitain, Brother to
Lewis XI. King of France; but he dying suddenly,
Henry at last was reconciled to Ferdinand and Isabella,
and died in the Year 1472. §. 9. Ferdinand the Catholick and Isabella. The Kingdom of Castile and Arragon united. From this match of Ferdinand (whom the
Castilians call The V. or The Catholick) with Isabella,
sprang the great Fortune and Power of spain, it under
his Reign arriving to that pitch of Greatness,
which ever since has made it both the Terrour and the
Envy of Europe. This Ferdinand also met with some
obstacles at the beginning of his Reign, the states of
Castile having limited his Power within too narrow
Bounds: And Joan, the late King Henry's supposed
Daughter, having contracted a match with Alfonso
King of Portugal, who entring Castile with a puissant
Army, caused her to be proclaimed Queen; but the

         Portugueses being soundly beaten, the whole design
vanished, and Joan retiring into a Monastery, the civil
Commotions were totally suppressed. The next care
of Ferdinand was to regulate such Disorders as were
crept into the Government in the former Reigns;
wherefore he caused that Law-book to be compiled,
which from the City of Toro, where it first was published,
is called Leges Tauri. In the Year also 1478,
the famous spanish Inquisition was first instituted by
him against the Moors and Jews,
         The first beginning of the spanish Inquisition. who having once
professed themselves Christians, did afterwards return
to their Idolatry and superstitious Worship. This
Court of Inquisition is esteemed an inhuman and execrable
Tribunal among other Nations, and carries
the greatest Injustice with it, in ordering the Children
to bear the Guilt of their Parents, nor permitting any
body to know his Accusers to clear himself against
them: But the spaniards ascribe to this Inquisition,
the benefit which they enjoy of one Religion, the variety
of which has brought great Inconveniencies upon
other states: 'Tis true, by those means you may
make Hypocrites, not sincere Christians. After he
had ordered his Affairs at home,1497. and after the death of
his Father, taken upon him the Government of Arragon,
he undertook an Expedition against the Moors
of Granada,
         1481. which lasted ten Years, wherein the spaniards
were routed near Mallaga,
         1483. but quickly revenged
themselves upon their Enemies, taking from
them one place after another, till they at last besieged
the City of Granada with 50000 Foot and 12000
Horse,Granada taken. 
          and having forced the King Boabdiles to a surrender,
they put an end to the Kingdom of the Moors
in spain,
         1492. after it had stood there for above 700 Years:
And to prevent the possibility of their ever encreasing
again in spain, he banished 170000 Families of Jews
and Moors out of spain, by which means, the Kingdom
nevertheless was despoiled of vast Riches, and of
a great number of Inhabitants. After this he took
from them Mazalquivir, Oran, Pennon de Velez and
Mellilla, situated upon the Coast of Barbary. Ferdinand
also made use of this opportunity to teach his
Nobles, who were grown overpowerfull, their due

Respect and Obedience to the King, and took upon
himself the sovereign Disposal of all the spanish Orders
of Knighthood, which were grown to that excess
of Riches and Power in spain, that they were
formidable to its Kings. Much about the same time
Christopher Columbus,
         1494. 
         a Genouese, discovered America,
after his Offers had been refused by the Kings of Portugal
and England;
         America discovered. 
          and after he had been seven
Years solliciting at the Court of Castile for a supply to
undertake the Voyage: At last 17000 Ducats were
employed in equipping three Vessels, out of which
stock such prodigious Conquests and Riches have accrued
to spain, that ever since it has aimed at the Universal
Monarchy of Europe. How easily the spaniards
did conquer these vast Countries, and with
what Barbarity they used the Inhabitants, is too long
to be related here. Not long after a War was kindled
betwixt spain and France, which has been the occasion
of inspeakable Miseries in Europe; after these two
Warlike Nations were freed from that Evil which had
hitherto diverted them from medling with Foreign
Affairs, the French having rid themselves from the
English, and the spaniards from the Moors. For,
when Charles VIII. The first rise of the War betwixt France and spain. 
          King of France, undertook an
Expedition against the Kingdom of Naples, Ferdinand
did not judge it for his Interest, to let the
French, by conquering this Kingdom, to become
Masters of Italy; especially, since by marrying his
Daughters he was in aliance with England, Portugal
and the Netherlands, and besides the then kings of
Naples descended from the House of Arragon: And
tho France lately entered with him into a Confederacy,
by vertue of which the French gave up Roussilion to
spain, hoping thereby to bring over Ferdinand to
their Party; nevertheless, when he perceived, That by
all his Intercessions he could not disswade him from
undertaking of this Expedition, he entered into a
Confederacy with the Pope, Emperour, Venice and
Milan against France. He also sent to the assistance
of the Neapolitans, Gonsalvus Ferdinand de C•rdua,
afterwards sirnamed The Grand Captain, under whose
Conduct the French were beaten out of the Neapolitan
         
Territories, whilst he himself made an inrode into
Languedock. In the Year 1500 the Moors living in
the Mountains near Granada rebelled, and were not
without great difficulty appeased. Afterwards an Agreement
was made betwixt Ferdinand and Lewis XII. 
King of France, concerning the Kingdom of Naples,
under pretence, to make War from thence against the
Turks; which being soon conquered by their joint
Power, they divided it according to their Agreement. 
But because each of them would have had this delicious
Morsel for himself, they fell at variance concerning
the Limits and some other matters which intervened
betwixt two Nations that had an animosity against
one another: Wherefore they came quickly to
Blows, and Gonsalvus routed the French near Ceriniola,
took the City of Naples, beat them again near
the River Liris or Garigliano, and taking Cajeta,
drove the French a second time out of the Kingdom
of Naples: But Gonsalvus was not rewarded by Ferdinand
according to his Deserts, for he not only lesiened
his Authority at Naples, but also being suspicious, that
he either intended to keep that Kingdom for Philip,
son-in-law to Ferdinand, or else for himself, Ferdinand
undertook a Journey in Person to Naples, on
purpose to bring Gonsalvus handsomly away from
thence; and taking him along with him into spain,
he treated him ill for his great deserts: In the mean
time died the Queen Isabella,
         1504. which occasioned some
Differences betwixt Ferdinand and his son-in-law Philip
the Netherlander,
         Philip. 
         Ferdinand pretending, according
to the last Will of Isabella, to take upon him the Administration
of Castile. And to maintain his Claim
the better, he entered into a Confederacy with France,
by marrying Germana de Foix, sister to Lewis XII. 
hoping thereby to obtain a powerfull Assistance, in
case Philip should come to attack him: But Philip
coming into spain, and taking upon him the Administration
of the Government in the name of his
Lady Joan,
         1506. 
         Ferdinand retired into Arragon. But Philip
died soon after, whose Queen Joan being not in
her right Wits, yet undertook the Administration of
the Government, not without the opposition of some

of the chief of the Nobility; wherefore, the Administration
of the Government was by common consent
committed to Ferdinand after his return from
Naples, notwithstanding the Emperour Maximilian
did pretend to it, in the right of his Grandson Charles. 
In the Year 1508 Ferdinand entered into a Confederacy
against the Venetians, whereby he regained the
Cities of Calabria, Brindisi, Otranto, Trano, Mola and
Polignano, which the Venetians had formerly obtained
for some services done to the Neapolitans. But as
soon as Ferdinand perceived that the Venetians were
like to be swallowed up by the Emperour and France,
the Pope and he left the Confederacy, thinking it
more convenient to preserve the state of Venice; since
by adding the Territories of Venice to those of Milan,
which were then possessed by the French, they would
have grown too powerfull in Italy. Hence arose a
War, in which John d' Albert, King of Navarre, taking
part with the French, was upon instigation of
Ferdinand excommunicated by the Pope; under
which pretext Ferdinand took an opportunity to possess
himself of that part of the Kingdom,1512. which lies
on the spanish side of the Pyrenean Mountains; which
since that time the French have in vain indeavoured to
recover. Ferdinand conquered Na
           ••arre. In the Year 1510 the spaniards took Bugia
and Tripolis upon the Coast of Barbary; but were
routed in the Island of Gerbis. This wise King died
in the Year 1516. §. 10. Him succeeded his Grandson by his Daughter,
Charles,
         Charles. the fifth Emperour of that Name, who,
with the assistance of the Cardinal Ximenes, immediately
took upon himself the Administration of the
Government, his Mother, to whom the same did belong,
being incapable of Administring it. This Prince,
who, since Charles the Great, was the most Potent
Prince that hath been in Europe, spent the greatest
part of his Life in Travels and Wars. In the very
beginning of his Reign, there were some Commotions
in spain, which were soon appeased. John D' Albert
also made an Inrode into the Kingdom of Navarre,
in hopes to recover it, but was quickly repulsed. 

But with the French, during his whole Life, he
waged continual Wars. For, though in the Year 1516,
he made a League with King Francis I. whereby the
Daughter of Francis was promised to him in Marriage;
yet was this Tie not strong enough to withhold
the Animosity of these two courageous Princes. 
Charles, who was flushed up with the great success of
his House, had always in his Mind his Motto, Plus ultra. 
But Francis, who was surrounded every-where
by so potent a Prince, did oppose his Designs with all
his Might, fearing, lest his Power should grow too
strong both for him and all the rest of Europe. Charles
obtained a most particular advantage. 1519. When the Imperial
Dignity was conferred upon him; to obtain
which for himself, or some-body else, Francis had laboured
with all his Might,Wars betwixt Charles and France. 
          but in vain. Robert de
Mare, Lord of sedan, withdrawing himself from the
Emperour, and putting himself under the Protection
of France, with whose assistance he attacked the Lord
of Emmerick, who was under the Emperour's protection,
administered new matter of jealsousie, which
quickly broke out into an open flame in the Netherlands. 
In which War the French lost Tournay and
st. Amant, but beat the Imperialists from before Meziores. 
Charles also did intend to drive the French
out of Milan upon instigation of Pope Leo X. Charles
pretending that Francis had neglected to receive this
Dutchy in fief of the Empire, beat the French near Bicoque. 
Fonterabie also, which they had taken by surprize,
was re-taken by force from the French. It proved
also very disadvantageous to them, that the Constable
Charles of Bourbon, sided with the Emperour;
and entring Provence,
         1524. besieged Marseilles; Which nevertheless
he was forced to quit, as soon as Francis
marched with all his Forces that way into Italy to
recover the Milaneze. Where he took the City of
Milan, but at the siege of Pavia was Attacked by the
Imperial Generals, who totally routed his Army; and
having taken him Prisoner,1525. carried him into spain. 
The King himself was in part the occasion of this loss,
he having sent a great part of his Army towards Naples
and savona; and those that remained with him,

were most Italians, swiss and Grisons, who did not
perform their Duty in the Battle; and most of his
Generals were of opinion, to avoid the hazard of a
Battle, by retiring under the City of Milan. The
French also succeeded ill in the Diversion, which they
endeavoured to give the Emperour; for by the help of
Charles Duke of Geldres, and the Friselanders, for
they were at that time worsted by Charles's Forces. 
There were some that advised Charles, to set Francis
at liberty without any Ransome, and by this Act of
Generosity to oblige him for ever: But he followed
the Counsels of such as did advise to make advantage
of so great a Prisoner. He therefore imposed very
hard Conditions upon him, which Francis refusing to
accept of, out of discontent fell into a dangerous sickness,
so that Charles himself went to visit and comfort
him; Though he was advised to the contrary by
his Chancellour Gallinaca, who alledged that such a
Visit, where he did not intend to promise the Prisoner
his liberty, would rather seem to proceed from
Covetousness, and fear of losing the advantage of his
Ransome, than from any civility or good inclination
towards him. And this sickness was the real cause,
why at last the Treaty, concerning his Liberty, which
had been so long on foot, was finished, the Emperour
fearing that his Discontent might plunge him into
another sickness, or Death it self. In the mean
time, the prodigious success which attended the Emperour,
did raise no small jealousie among other Princes;
and by instigation of Pope Clement VII. three
Armies were raised to maintain the Liberty of Italy. 
To prevent this storm, and especially to withdraw the
Pope from the Confederacy, the Emperour's Generals
marched directly against Rome, which they took by
storm, (where Charles of Bourbon was slain,) and for
several days together plundered the City, and committed
great Out-rages. The Pope himself was besieged
in the Castle of st. Angelo; and Charles, at the
same time that the Pope was enclosed, his own Forces
caused Prayers to be made for 40 days together,Rome taken by Charles V. for
his deliverance; at last, forced by Famine, he was
forced to surrender, and to renounce the above-mentioned

League. 1527. The Conditions, on which Francis
had obtained his Liberty, were, That Francis should
surrender the Dukedom of Burgundy; to renounce
the sovereignty over Flanders and Artois; quit all his
pretences upon Naples and Milan; to marry the
Emperour's sister Eleonora, and to give his two sons
as Pledges for the performance of these Articles. But
as soon as he got into his own Kingdom he protested
against the Treaty, which was extorted from him
during his Imprisonment: And making a League with
the Pope, England, Venice, the suiss and Florence,
sent an Army into Italy under the Command of Odet
de Foix, Lord of Lautree. This occasioned not only
that very gross words passed betwixt these two Princes,
but they also gave one another the lye, and a Challenge
passed betwixt them: But Lautree, who had at first
great success, being destroied with his Army by sickness
in the siege of Naples,
         A Peace mad• at Cambray. 
          a Peace was at last concluded
at Cambray, in the Year 1529, by virtue of
which Francis paid for his sons 2550000 Rixdollars, renounced
his Pretensions to Flanders, Artois, Milan, and
Nalpes, and married Eleonora, sister to the Emperour;
out of which Marriage, if a son should be born, he was
to be put into the possession of the Dukedom of Burgundy. 
In the Year 1530, Charles was Crowned by
Pope Clement VIII. at Bononia, whereby he obtained
from the Emperour, that the commonwealth of Florence
should be made a Principality, and the said City
was by force obliged to admit this Change. Alexander
de Medicis being constituted Duke, to whom the
Emperour married his natural Daughter Margaret. In
the same Year the Bishop of Ʋtrecht resigned the soveraignty
of that City, and the Province of Over-yssel,
into the Hands of Charles, and the Provinces of Geldren,
Zutphen, Groningen; the Twente and Drente also
fell into his Hands. In the Year 1535, he went with
a puissant Army into Africa, took Tunis and Goletta,
restoring the Kingdom of Tunis to Muleassa, who was
banished before by Haradin Barbarossa, but in Goletta
he left a Garrison. In the Year 1537, another War
broke out betwixt Charles and Francis: For the latter
could not digest the loss of Milan; and being advised

by the Pope, that when-ever he intended to Attack
Milan, he should first make himself Master of savoy;
and Francis sforzia dying at the same time, he fell
upon Charles Duke of savoy; and under pretence, that
he defrauded his Mother of her Dowry, drove him
quite out of savoy, and conquered a great part of Piedmont. 
But the Emperour, who was resolved to annex
the Dutchy of Milan to his Family, came to the
assistance of the Duke of savoy, and at the Head of
his Army, entring Provence, took Aix, and some other
Places; but his Army being much weakned with sickness,
for want of Provisions, he was forced to retire
again. In the Netherlands, the Imperialists took
st. Paul and Monstrevil, Killing great Numbers of the
French. 
         1538. Through Mediation of the Pope, Paul III. a
Truce of 10 Years was concluded at Nissa in Provence;
after which these two Princes had a friendly Interview
at Aigues Mortes. And in the next following Year,
the Emperour, against the advice of his friends, ventured
to take his way through the very heart of
France, being desirous with all possible speed to compose
the Disorders, which were arisen at Ghent. Yet
had he before by the Connestable Anna Montmorancy,
cajolled Francis into a belief, that he would restore to
him the Dutchy of Milan, which however he never
intended to perform. In the Year 1541, he undertook
an Expedition against Algiers in Africa, at the latter
end of the Year, against the advice of the Pope and others
of his friends, who persuaded him to stay till
next spring. He there Landed his Army with good
success; but a few days after such prodigious storms
and Rains did fall, which dispersed his ships, and
spoiled the Fire-locks of the souldiers, that the Emperour
was obliged, with the loss of one half of his
Army,1542. to return into spain. In the Year next following,
Francis broke with him again, under pretence
that his Ambassadours Caesar Fregosus and Anthony
Rinco, which he had sent through the Milanese, by
the way of Venice, to go to the Ottoman Port, were
upon the River Po Murthered by Orders of the Governour
of Milan. Wherefore William Duke of Cleves
entring Brabant on one side, the Duke of Orleans on

the other side, took Luxemburgh and some other places. 
The Dauphin besieged Perpignan, but was obliged to
raise the siege: The famous Pirate Barbarossa, did by
the instigation of Francis, great mischief on the seacoasts
of Calabria, destroying Nissa in Provence by Fire. 
Charles seeing himself at once attacked in so many
places, setting aside the Differences which were arisen
about the Divorce betwixt Henry and his Aunt Catherine,
made a League with Henry King of England,
wherein it was agreed, That the Emperour should
force his way through Champaigne, whilst Henry entered
into Picardy, that so they might, by joining their
Forces, ruine the whole Power of France. The Emperour
therefore, with an Army of 50000 men, beat
the Duke of Cleves in the Netherlands, forcing him
to surrender Guelderland; and after having recovered
the places in Luxemburgh, taken before by the French▪
         
entered into Campaigne, taking by force Lygny and
Disier: Francis kept with his Army on the other side
of the River Marne, and not daring to fight the Imperialists,
contented himself to ravage the Country
which they were to march through, to endeavour to cut
off their Provisions: Nevertheless the Imperial Army
found a sufficient quantity at Espernay and Chasteau
Thierry. This occasioned such a Terrour and Confusion
in Paris, that the Citizens were for leaving the City,
if the King, by his Presence, had not encouraged
them to stay. And if, on the other side, King Henry
had acted according to the Agreement, they might
easily have got the French Army betwixt them, and
in all likelyhood, would have put a period to the
French Greatness. But Henry being detained at the
sieges of Bologne and Monstrevil, sent word to the
Emperour, That he would not stir further, till he had
made himself Master of these two places. Charles
then began to suspect the King of England, whom he
perceived meerly to be for his own Interest, and did not
think fit to trust any longer; considering also with
himself what vast charges he was at in this War, and
how thereby his Designs were retarded which he had
projected against the Protestants in Germany; as also,
that his Forces had received a considerable overthrow

in Italy, near Carizola, from the French, he made
thereupon a Peace with Francis at Crespy in the County
of Valois. 
         Peace made at Crespy. 
          Then Charles undertook to subdue the
Protestants,1544. entring, for that purpose, into a League
with Pope Paul III. Charles wages War against the Protestants in Germany. 
          which War he carried on with
such success, that without great trouble he overthrew
them, making their chief Heads, the Elector
of saxony and Landtgrave of Hesse,
         1547. Prisoners: The
Emperour made use of this Policy, in fomenting Divisions
betwixt Duke Maurice and his Cousin, the
Elector of saxony; and refusing to fight with them
at first, he thereby protracted the War, foreseeing,
that a Confederacy under so many Heads would not
last long, and that the Cities, which contributed the
most towards it, would grow quickly weary of the
Charges of the War. Francis also, and Henry VIII. 
were both of them lately dead, who else, questionless,
with all their Power, would have opposed his designs
of oppressing the Protestants, thereby to make himself
absolute Master in Germany. The Heads also of
the Protestant League did greatly contribute to their
own Misfortune, they having let slip several opportunities,
especially, at first, before the Emperour had rightly
settled his Matters, when they might have done
him considerable mischief; nevertheless Charles was no
great gainer by these Victories, because he used the
Conquered, whom he was not able to keep in Obedience
by force, with too much rigour, keeping the
Captive Princes in too close an Imprisonment. He also
disobliged Maurice Elector of saxony, after his Father-in-law
the Landtgrave of Hesse, had by his persuasions
surrendered himself to the Emperour. The Elector
therefore being persuaded by the Prayers of his
Children and others, who objected to him, That by
his Assistance their Religion and Liberty were in danger
of being lost, he fell unawares upon Charles,
whom,1550. under favour of the Night and a Fogg, he
forced to retire from Inspruck. After this exploit a
Peace was concluded by the Mediation of King Ferdinand,
where,Treaty at Passaw. 
          in the Treaty at Passaw, the Protestant
Religion was established. In the mean while
Henry II. King of France, coming to the assistance of

the Protestants, had taken Metz, Toul and Verdun,
The Emperour attackt Metz again with great fury,
but having been fain to leave it after a considerable
loss sustained, he discharged his Fury upon Hesdin and
Tervanne, which he levelled with the Ground. In Italy
the Imperialists took siena,
         1554. which afterwards Philip
II. gave to Cosmus Duke of Tuscany, reserving to
himself the sovereignty and some sea-ports. At last,
Charles tired with the Toils of the Empire, and the
Infirmities of his Body, resigned the Imperial Crown to
his Brother Ferdinand, who would not consent that the
same should come to his son Philip. But to Philip he
gave all his Kingdoms and Territories, except those in
Germany (which fell to Ferdinand's share) reserving
to himself only a yearly allowance of 100000 Ducats. Abdication of Charles. 
         
He had made a little before, a Truce of five Years with
France, which was soon broke by the persuasions of
the Pope, who endeavouring to drive the Family of
Colonna out of their Possessions; and they being upheld
by the spaniards, the French sided with the Pope. 
But this War proved very unfortunate to the French,
they being routed at st. Quintins, lost that City, and
the Mareschal de Thermes was also soundly beaten near
Gravelin. 
         Peace betwixt spain and France, 1559. At last a Peace was again concluded at
Chateau en Chambrasis, by virtue of which, the
French were obliged to restore all what they had taken
in Italy, which had been the occasion of some
Blood-shed by Francis and Henry. But under-hand
it was agreed, That both the King of spain and
France should endeavour to root out the Hereticks
(as they called them) which succeeded afterwards very
ill both in spain and France. In the Year before this,
viz. 
         Charles dies. 
          1558, died Charles in the Convent of st. Justus
in spain, where he spent his last days in quiet. His
last Will and Testament (tho never so rational) was
so far from being pleasing to the Inquisition, that it
wanted but little of having been burnt as Heretical. 
But his Father Confessour and the rest of the Monks
in that Convent, who had been present, were forced
to undergo the severe Judgment of this Court. 
§. 11. Philip II. Under the Reign of Philip II. the greatness
of the spanish Monarchy began to be at a stand; neither
had its Kings the same success, as formerly, to
get vast Kingdoms by Marriages. For from the match
of Philip with Mary Queen of England, came no
Children. And truly, in my Opinion, the spanish
Greatness received the first shock at that time, when
Charles V. surrendered his Dominions in Germany to
his Brother Ferdinand, and afterwards had him elected
King of the Romans; by which means the Power
of this House was divided, and the Imperial Crown
separated from the spanish Monarchy. Charles would
fain have afterwards persuaded Ferdinand to transfer
the succession of the Imperial Crown upon Philip;
but he being persuaded by his son Maximilian to
keep what he had got, would in no ways part with it. 
He was also much beloved by the Germans, whereas
they had an aversion against Philip; who being a
meer spaniard, did not as much as understand the
German Tongue: And Ferdinand and his successours
proved very good Princes, who were not fond of the
spanish methods of Governing. But that which gave
the greatest shock to the spanish Greatness, were the
Troubles arisen in the Netherlands. The reason why
this Evil grew incurable, was, because Philip being over
fond of his ease, would rather sit still in spain, than by
his Presence endeavour to stop the current before it ran
too violent, tho' his Father did not think it too much,
to venture himself at the Discretion of Francis his
Rival, to appease the Tumults arisen only in the City
of Ghent. Another reason was, That he took the
most violent course, by sending the Duke of Alva, a
cruel Man, among the Netherlunders, who being used
to a mild sort of Government, were thereby put into
despair; especially when they were informed, That
the Inquisition had declared Criminal, not only those
who were guilty of the Rebellion, and pulling down
the Images, but also all such Catholicks as had not
made resistance against them. The saying of Anthony
Vargas, a spanish Minister, is a famous as ridiculous;
Haeretici diruerunt templa, boni nihil fecerunt
contra, ergo omnes debent patibulari; i. e. The Hereticks

demolished the Churches, the Catholicks did not
oppose them, wherefore they ought all to be hanged. Besides
this, the spaniards were much hated by the Netherlanders,
not only because of the great differences
there was betwixt the Manners of these Nations, but
also, because these latter had been in great esteem with
Charles V. who was very like them in all his Behaviour:
On the contrary, Philip only encouraged the
spaniards, who having an extraordinary conceit of
their own Abilities, and taking the Netherlanders for
Cowards, did not think they had Courage enough
to oppose their Designs. The spaniards also were well
pleased to see the Netherlanders to begin first, hoping
the King would thereby take an opportunity to clip
their Privileges, and by making them all alike obtain
an absolute Dominion over them: This done, they
hoped to make these Countries their Armory and
store-house, from whence they might with more ease
invade France and England, and raise the spanish Monarchy
to the highest degree of Greatness. But the
Netherlanders, on the other side, were resolved not to
part with their Liberty, nor to be treated as a conquered
Nation. And when Philip, at his departure,
would leave spanish Garrisons in the Netherlands, and
to soften the matter, constituted the Prince of Orange
and Earl of Egmont, Generals over them, yet could
they not be persuaded to accept of the same, alledging,
That the Netherlanders had got but very small
Advantages by the Peace with France, which they
had procured by their own Valour, if they now should
be in danger of being subdued themselves by a foreign
Power. The neighbouring Princes also, but especially
Elizabeth, Queen of England, took an opportunity by
these troubles to empty the vast Treasures of spain,
and to exhaust its strength. The Protestant Princes
also of Germany, who hated the spaniards, were glad
of this opportunity, and assisted the Prince of Orange
upon all occasions. And the Emperours thought it
more convenient to be at quiet and to please the Germans,
than to be too forward to assist their Cousins. 
These Commotions in the Netherlands did also occasion
the War betwixt Philip and Elizabeth,
         War with England. Queen of

         England, she not only affording assistance to the Netherlanders,
but also the English Privateers doing considerable
mischief to the spanish West-India ships; and
the famous Francis Drake plundered the very southern
Coast of America. On the other side, Philip,
by supporting the Rebels in Ireland, proved very
troublesome to Queen Elizabeth. At last Philip did
resolve with one stroke to put down the whole
strength of England; to which purpose he was equipping
a great Fleet for several Years together, which he
called The Invincible, the like never had been seen before
those times. The Fleet consisted of 150 sail of
ships, which carried 1600 great pieces of Brass Cannon,
and 1050 of Iron; 8000 seamen, 20000 souldiers,
besides Volunteers; the Charge amounted daily to
30000 Ducats, but the whole Preparations to twelve
Milions of Ducats. The Pope sixtus V. also excommunicated
Queen Elizabeth, assigning her Kingdom
to Philip. But all these Preparations came to nothing,
the greatest part of this Fleet being destroied,The spanish Armado destroyed. 
partly by the English and Dutch, partly by Tempests,
few returned home, and that in a most miserable condition,
so that there was scarce a Noble Family in
spain but went into Mourning for the loss of some
Friend or another. But the evenness of Temper is
much to be admired in Philip, who received this bad
news without the least alteration, giving only this
Answer, I did not send them out to fight against the
Winds and seas. 
         1588. Afterwards the English and Dutch
Fleets being joined, beat the spanish Fleet near Cadiz,
taking from the spaniards, not only a great many
ships richly laden, but also the City of Cadiz it self;
which nevertheless was again left by the English General,1596. 
the Earl of Essex, after he had plundered it,
to the great dishonour of the English, who might
from thence have done a great deal of mischief to the
spaniards. Neither did spain get any advantage by
having entangled it self in the Troubles, and (as it
was called) the holy League, made in France. Philip,
'tis true, proposed to himself to have met with a fair
opportunity, by excluding the Bourbon Family to annex
the Crown of France to his House, or by raising

Divisions in this Kingdom to swallow up one piece or
another, or to assist one of his Creatures in obtaining
that Crown; or, at least, by dividing it into so many
Factions, so to weaken its strength, as that it should
not be able to recover it self for a considerable time. 
But by the Courage and good Fortune of Henry IV. 
all these Measures were broke, and he declaring himself
a Catholick, took away the Foundation whereupon
the League was built. Thus Philip lost his vast
Expences; and besides this, suffered extreamly in his
Affairs; for in the mean time that he sent the Duke of
Parma, Governour of the Netherlands, to the assistance
of the League in France, the Confederate Netherlanders
had leisure given them to put themselves
and their Affairs into a good posture: Philip acted in
this business according to the old proverb; That he
who hunts two Hares at once, commonly catches neither
of them: Besides, Henry IV. after he had restored his
Affairs in France,
         1594. declared War against Philip; which
was nevertheless carried on in the Netherlands with
various success, the Count de Fuentes taking Cambray
in the Year 1595, and in the Year next following, the
Archduke Albert, Calais. On the other side, Henry
recovered Fere from the spaniards. In the Year 1597,
the spaniards took Amiens by surprise, which Henry
recovered not without great difficulty. At last, a
Peace was concluded in the same Year betwixt France
and spain at Vervin,
         Peace made at Vervin. 
          because Philip was unwilling to
leave his son, who was but young, entangled in a
War with so great a Captain as Henry was; and Henry
was sensible, that the Kingdom of France being enervated
did greatly want a Peace. Philip also waged several
Wars against the Turks; for the Pyrate Dragutes
had taken from the spaniards Tripoli,
         1551. after they had
been in possession of it for forty Years. To retake this,
Philip sent a strong Army,1560. which took the Isle of Gerbis;
but being afterwards beaten by the Turkish Fleet, he
lost, together with the Island, 18000 Men and 42 ships. 
In the Year 1564 Philip retook Pegnon de Velez. In the
Year 1566 Maltha was besieged by the Turks during
the space of four Months, which was relieved by Philip,
he forcing the Turks to raise the siege with great loss. 

In the Year 1571 the Confederate Fleet of spain,
Venice, and other Italian states, under the Command
of Don John of Austria, did obtain a most signal Victory
over the Turkish Fleet near Lepanto, whereby
the Turkish Naval strength was weakened to that degree,
that they were never afterwards so formidable in
those seas, as they were before: But else the spaniards
had got no great Reputation in this War; for by their
delays that considerable Island of Rhodes was lost before. 
In the Year 1573 Don John of Austria passed with an
Army into Africa, to retake Tunis, which succeeded
so well, that he forced the City, and added a new Fortification
to it: But in the Year next following, the Turks
sent a puissant Army thither, and retook the City, its
Fortifications being not quite perfected, as also Goletta,
which being not very well provided with all Necessaries,
was lost by the unskilfulness and Cowardice of the Governour;
so that the whole Kingdom of Tunis, to the
great prejudice of the Christians, fell into the Hands
of the Turks. At home Philip had a War with the
Marans of Granada, who rebelling against him, were
supported by the Algerines, and could not be subdued
but with great difficulty; and if the Turks had been
quick enough in giving them timely assistance, it
might have proved very dangerous to spain. This
Rebellion did not end till the Year 1570, after it had
continued for three years. 1592. There were also some Commotions
among the Arragonians; who pretended to
take part with Anthony Perez, who standing upon his
privilege against the Process that was made him for
having upon the King's Orders, murthered Escovedo,
an intimate Friend of Don John of Austria. Philip,
by this intended to purge himself of the Infamy of the
fact, and at once to revenge himself upon Perez,
who had been unfaithfull to him in some Love Intrigue,
aiming at that himself which he had undertaken
to procure for the King. And tho this did not
much redound to the honour of Philip, yet by this he
took an opportunity to retrench the Privileges of the
Arragonians. In the Year 1568, Philip caused his son
Charles to be killed, under pretence that he had endeavoured
to kill his Father; and not long after, the

Queen Isabella also, Charles's step-mother, died, not
without suspicion of having been poisoned. But a
great many are of opinion, that some Love Intrigues
were the occasion of their death, which is the more
probable, because the said Isabella being intended for
the Bride of Charles, had been taken by the Father
in spite of his son. Portugal falls to spain. 
         Henry King of Portugal dying,
there were several pretenders to that Crown, among
whom was Philip,
         1579. as being born of Isabella, Emanuel
King of Portugal's Daughter, who maintained his
Right by the sword; and under the Conduct of the
Duke of Alva conquered the Kingdom, forcing Anthony,
the Bastard, who had caused himself to be proclaimed
King, to fly into England, and from thence
into France,
         1595. where he died an Exile in Paris: Only
the Island of Tercera held out for some time longer,
which the French intending to relieve, were totally
routed by the spaniards. And thus Philip became
Master, both of the East and West Indies, the two
greatest Mines of Riches in the World. Nevertheless,
the French, English and Hollanders had found out a
way to ease him of these prodigious Revenues. For
Philip, just before his death, did confess, That the
War with the Netherlands only, had cost him 564
Millions of Ducats. And truly, it is very probable,
that trusting to his vast Riches he was thereby
prompted to his ambitious Designs, and to undertake
more than proved beneficial to him. He died
in the Year 1598. §. 12. Philip III. 
         Philip the IIId's Father had left him the
Kingdom in Peace with France, but the Dutch War
grew every day the heavier upon the spaniards. The
spaniards did hope, that after Philip II. in his latter
days had married his Daughter Clara Eugenia to Albert
Archduke of Austria, giving her the Netherlands
for a Dowry, the Dutch would become more pliable,
and reunite themselves with the rest of the Provinces
in the Netherlands, as having now a Prince of their
own, and not liable to the spanish Government. But
because the Hollanders did by no means like this bait,
and at the siege of Ostend gave a tast to the spaniards,
         
both of their strength and firm Resolution, that
they were resolved to stand it out with them, the spaniards
resolved to make Peace with them; especially
since the Hollanders had found out the way to the
East Indies, where they made great progress; France
also enjoying a peaceable Government under Henry IV. 
and encreasing in Power, it was feared, That if the
French should fall upon spain with fresh Forces,
which had been tired out by this tedious War, it might
prove fatal to spain. They were also in hopes, that the
fear of a foreign Enemy ceasing, the Hollanders in time
of Peace might fall into Divisions among themselves;
or at least, that Peace and Plenty might abate their
Courage. The spaniards did sufficiently shew their eagerness
for a Peace with Holland, by setting the Treaty
on foot in the Hague, by sending Ambrosius spinola himself,
among others, thither as Ambassadour, and by granting
and allowing them the East India Trade. Whereas
the Hollanders carried it very high, and would not
abate an ace of their Proposals. Truc• with Holland. 
          At last, a Truce for
twelve Years was concluded with Holland. In the
Year next following,1609. 
         Philip banished 900000 Marans
(the Off-spring of the ancient Moors, who had professed
themselves Christians only for a shew) out of
spain, because they intended to raise a Rebellion, and
had underhand craved Assistance from Henry IV. In
the same Year the spaniards took the Fortress of Arache,
situated on the Coast of Africa; as they had
likewise possessed themselves before of the Harbour of
Final,
         1602. near Genoua, in the Year 1619. Those of the
Valtelins did withdraw themselves from the Grisons. 
The spaniards sided with the former, in hopes to unite
them with the Dukedom of Milan. But France taking
part with the Grisons, the business was protracted
for a great many years, till at last matters were restored
to their former state. This difference did rouse
up all Italy, and the Pope himself took part with the
Grisons, tho Protestants, assisting them in the recovery
of the Valtelins. The War being broken out in
Germany, the spaniards sent Ambrose spinola out of
the Netherlands into the Palatinate, part of which was
subdued by them. Philip III. died in the Year 1621. 
§. 13. Philip IV. His son Philip IV. at the very beginning of
his Reign made great alterations in the Court, sending
away the Creatures of the Duke de Lerma, the Favourite
of his Father: He himself foreseeing what was
likely to befall him, did timely obtain a Cardinal's
Cap, fearing the King should aim at his Head. With
the beginning of the Reign of this King, the Truce
with Holland being expired, the War was rekindled,
in which spinola was forced to raise the siege of Bergen
op Zoom, because Christian Duke of Brunswick, and
General Mansfeld,
         1622. having before routed the spaniards
near Fleury, came to the assistance of the Hollanders. 
Pieter Heyn surprised the spanish silver Fleet, with a
Booty of 12 Millions of Gilders. 1628. At the same time
the Hollanders did settle themselves in Brasile, taking
the City of Olinda. In the Year 1629, the spaniards being
in hopes to make a considerable Diversion, and to
put the Dutch hard to it, made an Inrode into the Velaw,
and took Amersfort, whilst the Hollanders were busied
in the siege of Hertogenbusk Bois le Duc, but the Hollanders
taking Wesel by surprise, they were obliged to retreat
with all speed over the River Yssel, for fear, that
their retreat should be cut off by the Dutch. In the
Year 1639, a great Fleet was sent out of spain into the
Channel, under the Command of Don Oquendo, which
was destroied by Martin Tromp, in the Downs, in the
very sight of the English. What the Intention was of
sending so great a Fleet this way, was not generally
known at that time; but afterwards it was divulged,
that the same was intended against sweden, and that
there were 20000 Men ready in Denmark, which, as
soon as this Fleet should have appeared before Gothenburg,
were to have joined them and entered swedeland. 
Afterwards the War was protracted, but most
to the disadvantage of the spaniards, till the Year
1648, when the spaniards concluded a Peace with
the Hollanders at Munster, declaring them a free
People, renouncing all their pretences over them, and
leaving to them all the places which they had taken
from them. And notwithstanding France did its utmost
to hinder the conclusion of this Peace, at least
so long, till that Kingdom might also make a Peace

with spain; but the Hollanders did not think it adviseable
to stay their leisure, fearing, that if spain
was brought too low, the French would thereby be
enabled to swallow up the Netherlands, and become
their immediate Neighbours, which they foresaw
would prove fatal to their state. It was also alledged,
and that with good reason, That it was time to put up
the sword, when all those things might be obtained
by fair means for which it was drawn at first; and
that the Province of Holland had contracted considerable
Debts. spain also perceiving, that the Dutch
were not to be overcome by force, was willing to agree
to those Conditions, being glad to be rid once of
so troublesome an Enemy, that they might have the
more leisure to be even with France and Portugal. It
is reported, that this War cost the spaniards above
One thousand five hundred Millions of Ducats. In
the Year 1628, Vincent II. Duke of Mantua, dying,
the Emperour endeavoured to exclude Charles Duke of
Nevers, he being a Frenchman born, from the succession
of that Dukedom, under pretence of having neglected
some Matters appertaining to it, as being a Fief
of the Empire. The savoyards also took this opportunity
to renew their Pretensions upon Montferrat,
and the spaniards, in hopes of getting something in
the Fray, besieged Casal. On the other side, the
French took part with the Duke of Nevers, raised
the siege of Casal, and put the Duke of Nevers into
possession of the Dukedom of Mantua, which did
much weaken the Reputation of the spaniards in Italy. 
In the Year 1635, the French denounced War
against spain, under pretence, that they had taken
prisoner Philip Christopher Elector of Treves, he being
under the protection of the King of France, and
that they had driven the French Garrison out of Treves,
and possessed themselves of that City; but the true
reason was, that it was thought high time to bridle
the Ambition and Power of the House of Austria,
which after the Battel of Nordlingen, and the Peace
concluded at Prague, was grown very formidable, and
France being well settled at home, began to be in a
very flourishing condition. The French therefore, after

they had beat the Prince Tomaso near Avennes, entered
the Netherlands with a great Army, but the success
did not answer Expectation; the Dutch especially
being unwilling, that France should make any
considerable Conquests on that side: Neither did the
French gain any thing in Italy. In the Year next following
the Prince of Conde was forced to raise the siege
of Dole; and the spaniards entring Picardy filled Paris
it self with Terrour and Confusion. Gallas also,
the Imperial General, endeavoured to enter Burgundy
with his Army, but did not advance much. In the
Year 1637 the spaniards lost Landresi. In the next
Year they were forced to retire from before Leucate
with great loss; but the Prince of Conde, on the other
hand,1639. had the same ill fortune before Fonterabia; the
spaniards beat the French soundly near Thionville, but
lost Hesdin, salses and satins; and in the Year following,
the strong City of Arras, they being besides
this, routed near Casal: Nor could they with all
their strength force the Earl of Harcourt from before
Turin. 
         Catalonia rebels. 
          In the same Year also the Catalonians did revolt,
they being first dissatisfied at the Pride of the Duke
d'Olivarez, the King's Favourite, against whom they
had made great complaints, but were nevertheless
sorely oppressed by him. These discontents encreased
after the Catalonians, endeavouring the relief of salses,
were beaten, they pretending that they were not
duely assisted by the Castilians, and therefore left the
Army and marched home. Conte Duca taking this
opportunity, represented them very ill to the King,
and caused their Privileges to be considerably diminished,
and their Country to be oppressed with their
quartering of souldiers. This put them in open Rebellion,
and Barcellona beginning first, they drove the
spaniards out of Catalonia. Then seeking Aid from
France, they at last, after the spaniards had cut off
by their Cruelty, all hopes of Mercy, put themselves
under the Protection of that Kingdom: And it was
eleven Years before the spaniards could quite recover
Catalonia, the intestine Commotions in France presenting
them with a fair opportunity; for Barcellona,
being not timely relieved, was forced to surrender to

the spaniards;
         1651. but the Portugueses withdrawing
themselves from the Obedience of the spaniards,
         Portugal falls off from spain. 
          gave
a great shock to the spaniards. Philip II. tho he had
conquered this Kingdom,1640. yet had always endeavoured
by mildness, and by preserving their Privileges, to
mitigate the hatred which the Portugueses bore to the
Castilians, which were grown to that height, that the
Priests used to insert it in their Prayers, That God would
be pleased to deliver them from the Castilian Yoak:
But after his death the spanish Ministers had not been
so carefull by maintaining their Privileges, to keep
the affection of the Portugueses, but rather had treated
them as a conquered Nation; which so exasperated
the Portugueses, that as soon as they saw spain begin
to decline,1636. immediately some places in Portugal
did rebel, but were soon after reduced to their former
Obedience. The spaniards therefore thought it adviseable,
that to bridle this People, nothing could be
more proper, than by employing the Nobles as well as
the Commoners in the Wars, to purge the superfluous
ill Humours of this Nation. In the mean while the
Catalonians falling into Rebellion, the Portuguese
Nobles were ordered to go into the Field, which they
did not relish well; having besides this, some other
reasons to be dissatisfied with the spaniards: And, because
the Portugueses had a great affection for the
Duke of Braganza, the spaniards tried all ways to
entice him to come to Court, and supposing that
they had cajolled him sufficiently with fair promises,
invited him very courteously to go in person with the
King into the Field; which invitation, nevertheless
he knew how to decline very dexterously. At last
the Portuguese Nobility being hard pressed to serve
in the Expedition against the Catalonians,
         The Portugueses. which they
would in no ways consent to, unanimously agreed
to shake off the Castilian Yoak, and secretly sounded
the Inclinations of the Duke of Braganza. As soon
as he, upon the perswasions of his Lady, had re•olved
to accept of the Crown, they broke loose, and surprising
the Garrison in the City, Palace and Fort,
seized the ships, killed the secretary of state Vasconcello,
who had carried himself very proudly among

them,Duke of Braganza proclaimed King of Portugal. 
          and proclaimed the Duke of Braganza
King, under the Name of John IV. purging the whole
Kingdom within eight days of the Castilians, and that
with the loss only of two or three persons. Which
may serve as a remarkable instance to convince the
World, how easily a Kingdom is lost, where the
Peoples Inclination is averse to the supream Head. 
Thus the spanish Monarchy received a great blow, and
its Power being distracted, it could not act effectually
on all sides. 1642. They also lost Perpignan; tho the
French could not go further into spain, for the Prince
of Conde besieged Lerida in vain. 1647. In the Year 1641,
the Prince Monaco driving the spanish Garrisons out
of his Territories, put himself under the protection of
France. 
         Massan•llo's Rebellion at Naples, 1647. There also happened a most dangerous Rebellion
at Naples, the Head of which was a poor
Fisherman, whose Name was Massanello; who
might have put the whole Kingdom into a flame, if
the French had been at hand to give him timely assistance;
but by the prudent management of the Governour,
the Earl of Ognato, the Tumult was appeased. 
spain then being forced to quench the flames on
all sides, it could not be so mindfull of Holland, as the
most remote, having all hands full, to resist the dangers
threatning them nearer home. And the spaniards
had the good fortune to reduce, as we said before,
Catalonia, under their subjection, and to chase
the French out of Piombino and Porto Longone;
         1650. but
the English took from them the Island of Jamaica in
the West Indies. At last France being re-established
in its former Tranquility, the spaniards thought it
most convenient to make Peace with that Crown:
Which was concluded betwixt the two great Ministers
of state, the Cardinal Mazarini and Don Lewis de
Haro,
         The Pyrenean Treaty. in the Pyrenean Mountains: By vertue of which
France got Roussilion, and several considerable places
in the Netherlands. spain having thus concluded a
Peace with all the rest of its Neighbours, it began in
earnest to make War against Portugal. The spaniards
therefore entered Portugal with a great Force, taking
from the Portugueses several places, but were also
at several places soundly beaten. The Battel near

         Entremos,
         1662. where Don Juan, and that near Villa Viciosa,
where Caracena received a fatal Defeat,1665. are most
famous: The obtaining of which two Victories on
the Portuguese side is chiefly ascribed to the French
General schomberg. Philip IV. died in the Year 1665. §. 14. Charles II. He had for his successour his son Charles II. 
a Child of four years of age, who under the Tuition
of his Mother, negligently prosecuted the War against
Portugal,
         1668. and at last, by the Mediation of England,
was forced to make Peace with that Crown,Peace with Portugal. 
          renouncing
his right to the same; because the French at that
time made a grievous havock in the Netherlands. For
tho' Mary Teresia, Daughter of Philip IV. at the
time when she was married to the King of France had
renounced all her right of succession to her paternal
Inheritance, yet the French taking the opportunity of
their flourishing condition, and the decaied state of
spain, England also and Holland being engaged in a
War with one another, who would else not have left
the Netherlands to be devoured by them; they entered
Flanders with a vast Army, using among other
things, for a pretence, that which in Brabant is called,
Jus devolutionis, by which the real Estates of
private persons, fall to the Children born during the
time of the first marriage, as soon as the Father
marries again. The French took in this War, without
much resistance, a great many considerable Cities
and Forts, viz. Charleroy, Tournay, Lisle, Douay,
Oudenarde, and some others; they conquered also the
whole Franche Compte, which hastened the Peace betwixt
England and Holland,
         The Tripple Alliance. and occasioned the Tripple
Alliance, as it is called, made betwixt England, sweden
and Holland, for the preservation of the spanish
Netherlands. In the following Year France made a
Peace with spain at Aix la Chapelle,
         Peace made at Aix la Chapelle. restoring to spain
the Franche Compte, but keeping what places he had
taken in Flanders. 
         1668. But when Holland, in the Year
1672, was attacked by the French, spain sided with
the Dutch, knowing that the loss of the Ʋnited Provinces
must draw after it that of the spanish Netherlands:
so it came again to an open War, wherein, at first,

         spain lost Burgundy. The rebellious Messineses threw
themselves under the protection of France, but were
afterwards deserted by them. France also got Limburgh,
Conde,
         Peace made as Nimmegen, 1679. 
         Valencienne, Cambray, Ypres, st. Omer,
Aeth and Ghent: But a Peace was concluded at
Nimmegen, by virtue of which France kept the Franche
Compte, and most places taken in the Netherlands,
restoring only to spain, Limburgh, Ghent, Cortryck,
Oudenarde, Aeth and Charleroy. 
        §. 15. The Nature of the spaniards. 
          Having thus given a brief History of the
Kingdom of spain, we will also add something concerning
the Genius of the spaniards, and the extent of
their Territories, as also of the strength and Weakness
of this Kingdom, and its Condition in reference to its
Neighbours: The spanish Nation therefore is commonly
esteemed to be very wise, and to take remote
prospects, throughly weighing a thing before it undertakes
it. Whereby, nevertheless the spaniards, being
overcautious and exact in their Counsels, do often
lose the opportunities of action. Besides this, the
spaniards are very constant to their Resolutions; and
tho' they fail once in an Attempt, they will try their
Fortune again, endeavouring to overcome its frowns
by their Constancy. They are very fit for War, and
not only brave at the first attack, but also will hold
out till the last; their sober way of living, and spare
Bodies make them fit to bear Hunger and Thirst, and
to be very watchfull: But this the spaniards are extreamly
blamed for, that they maintain their Gravity
by high-flown Words and a proud Behaviour. Tho'
those that converse with them, do declare, that this Gravity
which appears so odious, is not so much the effect
of their Pride, as of a melancholy Constitution and an
ill Custom, they never being fond to converse much
with Foreign Nations. They are in general, very
zealous for the Roman Catholick Religion, and abominate
all others. They are seldom fit for any Trade or
Business where any hard labour is required; such as
Husbandry, or any Handycraft Trades; wherefore
these are chiefly managed among them by Foreigners. 
It is credibly reported, That in Madrid alone, there

are above 40000 Frenchmen, being for the most part,
Merchants, Artists, Handycrafts-men and Labourers,
who go under the Name of Burgundians, thereby to
avoid the hatred, which the spaniards naturally bear
against the French. And such is the spanish pride,
that tho' they think it below themselves to meddle
with those trifles, yet they do not think much to be a
poor Centinel in some Fort or another all their life
time, the honour of the sword, and hopes of becoming
in time an Officer, making them amends for what
hardship they endure. Their Pride, Covetousness and
rigorous proceedings make them hatefull to all such
as are under their Command; which are very unfit
Qualifications for the maintaining of great Conquests. 
For no body is willing to be despised by Foreign Governours. 
spain being mightily exhausted of Men,
and therefore incapable of raising great Armies within
it self, is very unfit to maintain vast Countries, for
which several reasons may be given. For the Women
here are not so fruitfull as in the Northern parts,
which is to be attributed to the heat of the Climate,
and the constitution of their spare Bodies. Those
parts also which are remote from the sea-shore, are
not well peopled, some of these Grounds being very
barren, not producing any thing for the subsistance of
Mankind. Whoring also being publickly allowed of
here; a great many of them will rather make shift
with a Whore than to maintain a Wife and Children. 
These also, who have taken upon them holy Orders,
of whom there is a great number, are obliged not to
marry. The Wars which they have waged against so
many Nations, but especially in Italy and the Netherlands,
have devoured a great many spaniards. A vast
number have transplanted themselves into America,
being glad to go to a place where they may with a
small beginning come to live very plentifully. Before
the discovery was made of America, Ferdinand the
Catholick, had at once before the City of Granada,
an Army of 50000 Foot and 20000 Horse, tho' Arragon
did not concern it self in that War, and Portugal
and Navarre were at that time not united with Castile. 
At last this Country was mightily dispeopled,

when Ferdinand, after the taking of Granada, and
Philip III. banished a great many thousands of Jews
and Marans, who could not be kept in obedience in
spain; these settling themselves in Africa, retain to
this day their hatred against the Christians, robbing
their ships in those seas. But this is evident enough,
that the spaniards could never have made a Conquest
of those vast Countries, by force of Arms, if the
greatest part of them had not fallen into their Hands
by easier ways. §. 16. The Constitution of the spanish Countries. Concerning those Countries which are under
the Jurisdiction of this Nation; spain is large enough
in extent for the number of its Inhabitants, but it is
not fertile alike in all places; for the most remote
parts from the sea-coasts are many of them barren,
not producing any thing for the subsistance of Men or
Beasts: But for the most part, nearer to the sea-side, it
is very fine and fruitfull. There is abundance of sheep
here. They have also very fine Horses, but not in
very great quantities, having scarce enough for their
own use. This Kingdom is very well situate for
Trade, having on the one side the Ocean, and on the
other side, being almost surrounded by the Mediterranean,
where they have most excellent Harbours. 
The product of their Grounds and Commodities fit
for Exportation, are especially, Wooll, silk, Wine,
Oyl, Raisons, Almonds, Figs, Citrons, Rice, soap,
Iron, salt, and such like. In former times the spanish
Gold-mines were most famous, but now-a-days, neither
Gold nor silver, as far as I know, is digged out
in spain: some will alledge for a reason, That it is
forbidden under severe penalties, to keep it as a reserve
in case of a great extremity. But I am rather
apt to believe, That those Gold-mines have been long
a-goe quite exhausted by the Avarice of the spaniards. 
        §. 17. The spanish West Indies. The greatest Revenue of spain comes from
the East Indies, from whence Gold and silver, like
Rivulets are conveyed into spain, and from thence
into the other parts of Europe. At what time, and
by whom this Country, which had been so long unknown

to the Europeans, was first discovered, we have
already mentioned. Tho' there are that pretend,
That America was discovered in the Year 1190, by
one Madoe, son to Owen Gesneth, a Prince in Wales,
who they say, made two Voyages thither; and having
built a Fort in Florida or Virginia, or as some say, in
Mexico, died in America: And this is the reason why
in the Mexican Tongue abundance of British words
are to be met withall; and that the spaniards, at their
first coming into America did find the remnants of
some Christian Customs among the Inhabitants: From
whence some inferr, That if the first discovery of a Country,
gives a good Title of Propriety to the Discoverers,
England would have as good, if not a better Title to
America than spain; but this we will leave to be decided
by others. But it is not so evident, from
whence spain could claim a right of subduing that
Countrey by force of Arms. For, what is alledged among
other pretences, concerning the Bull of Alexander
VI. wherein he did grant those Countries to
spain, this does not only seem ridiculous to us, but
also to those Barbarians themselves, who have ridiculed
it, saying, The Pope must be a strange sort of a Man,
who pretended to give away that which was none of his
own: But let this be as it will, the spaniards think it
sufficient that they are in possession of it; and if an
exact scrutiny should be made into other matters of
this nature, it would appear, that the Titles to most
conquered Countries were none of the best. But
some of the most conscientious spaniards do not justifie
what Cruelties, their Country-men committed in
the beginning against those poor People, of whom
they killed, without any provocation given, a great
many hundred thousands; or destroyed them by
forcing them to undergo intolerable hardships, and
making the rest their slaves: Tho' afterwards Charles
V. being informed of their miserable condition, ordered
all the rest of the Americans to be set at liberty. 
But the spaniards are not Masters of all America, but
only of the middle part of it, viz. The Kingdoms of
Peru and Mexico, and those vast Islands of Hispaniola,
Cuba and Porto Ricco, Jamaica having been taken

from them by the English. These parts of America
are now-a-days inhabited by five several sorts of People:several sorts of Inhabitants in the spanish West Indies. 
         
The first are the spaniards, who come thither
out of Europe; these are put in all Offices. The second
are called Crioliens, who are born in America
of spanish Parents: These are never emploied in any
Office, as being ignorant of the spanish Affairs, and
too much addicted to love their native Country of America;
wherefore the King is cautious in giving them
any Command, fearing, lest they should withdraw
themselves from the Obedience of spain, and set up
a Government of their own; especially, because these
Crioliens bear a great hatred against the European
spaniards. For this reason also the Governours are
changed every three Years, to take away the opportunity
of strengthening their Interest too much; who
after their return into spain are made Members of the
Council for the Indies, as being esteemed the most
proper to advise concerning the preservation of that
Country. The third sort are called Metiffs, who are
born of a spanish Father and an Indian Mother, are in
no esteem among them. Those who are brought
forth of the marriage of a spaniard with a Metiff,
or of a Metiff and a spanish Woman, are called Quatralvos,
as having three parts of a spaniard, and one
of an Indian: But such as are born of a Metiff and an
Indian Woman, or of an Indian Man and a Metiffic
are called Tresalvos, as having three parts of an Indian
and one of a spaniard. The fourth sort are the remnants
of the ancient Inhabitants, of whom a great many
are to be met with, especially in the Kingdoms of
Peru and Mexico, who are not so Barbarous as some
may imagine, there having been found among them
such excellent Laws and Constitutions as would make
some Europeans blush. The fifth sort are the Moores,
or, as the spaniards call them, Negroes, who being
bought in Africa are sent thither to do all sorts of
drudgery. These are generally very handy, but very
perfidious and refractary, wherefore they must always
be kept under a strict hand. such as are born of a
Negro and an Indian Woman are called Mulats: Yet
is that part of America, considering its bigness, not

very well stocked with People, since the spaniards did
in a most cruel manner root out the most of its ancient
Inhabitants: And if I remember well, Hieronymus
Benzonus says, That all the Cities in America, which
are inhabited by the spaniards, joined together, were
scarce to be compared, for number of People, with the
suburbs of Milan: Yet there are some who talk largely
concerning Mexico, viz. That it has betwixt 30
and 40000 spanish Citizens, who are most of them
very wealthy, so that it is reported, there are 18000
Coaches kept in that City. The spaniards are not easily
to be beaten out of America; because most places
which are in their possession, are hard to come at, and
it is very difficult to transport such a number of souldiers
out of Europe, as can be sufficient to attack any
of these places: Besides this, the great difference of the
Climate, and Diet could not but occasion mortal sicknesses
among them: But in Peru, especially, they are
very well settled, there being scarce any access by
Land, and by sea you are obliged to go round the
south and remotest parts of America, or else to come
from the East Indies; both which are such long seavoyages,
which an Army can scarce undergo without
running the hazard of being destroied by sickness. 
Concerning the Riches of America,
         Riches of America. 
          'tis true, the spaniards
at their first coming thither did find no coined
Gold or silver, that being unknown in those days to
the Inhabitants; but an inconceivable quantity of
uncoined Gold and silver, and abundance of Gold
and silver Vessels made without Iron Tools, all which
the spaniards carried into spain, except what the
seas swallowed up in their Voyages, which was very
considerable: But now-a-days those Rivers which
formerly used to carry a Golden sand, are most exhausted;
and what is found there now is all dug up
out of the Mines; especially the silver Mines of Porosi
in Peru, do afford an incredible quantity of silver,
which is yearly, together with some other Commodities,
transported in a Fleet into spain: Nevertheless
a great part of this silver belonging to Italian, French,
English and Dutch Merchants, the least part of it remains
in spain; so that the spaniards keep the Cow,

but others have the Milk: Wherefore, when the
French and spanish Ambassadours at Rome quarreled about
Precedency,1563. and the latter, to represent his
Master's Greatness, spoke very largely of the vast
Riches of America, the Frenchman answered, That
all Europe, but especially spain, had been a considerable
loser by them: The spaniards having employed
themselves in searching after the Treasures of America,
were thereby become idle, and had dispeopled their own
Country. The King of spain trusting to his great
Riches, had begun unnecessary Wars. spain being the
fountain from whence vast Riches were derived to other
Nations, did receive the least benefit of all by
them, since those Countries that furnished spain with
souldiers, and other Commodities did draw those Riches
to themselves. Formerly there were also Emeraulds in
America, and Pearls were found, but that stock is
long since, by the Avarice of the spaniards, quite exhausted. 
There is besides this, a great quantity of
Commodities in America, which are used in Physick
and Dying Colours. There is also great quantities of
sugars and Hides, as appears in that in the Year 1587
the spainsh Fleet transported 35444 Hides from
st. Domingo, and 64350 from New spain: For the
Oxen and Cows, which were first transported from
spain into America, are grown so numerous, that they
shoot them for their Hides sake only, throwing away
the Flesh, which is scarce eatable. And as America
is the best Appendix of the spanish Kingdom, so
the spaniards take all imaginable care to prevent its
being separated from spain. They make, among other
things, use of this Artifice, That they will not allow
any Manufactory to be set up in America, so that
the Inhabitants cannot be without the European Commodities,
which they do not suffer to be transported
thither in any other ships but their own. §. 18. Besides this,The Canary Islands. the Canary Islands are in the
possession of the spaniards, from whence are exported
great quantities of sugar and Wine, it is credibly reported,
That England alone transports above 13000
Pipes of Canary, at 20l. per Pipe. The Island of

         sardinia also belongs to the spaniards,
         sardinia. which Isle is
pretty large, but not very rich, its Inhabitants being
for the most part Barbarians. 
         sicily. The Isle of sicily is of
much greater value, from whence great quantities of
Corn and silk are to be exported; but the Inhabitants
are an ill sort of People, who must be kept under,
according to the old Proverb, Insulani quidem
mali, siculi autom pessimi. Unto sicily does belong the
Isles of Maltha and Goza, which was given in Fief
from Charles V. to the Order of the Knights of
Rhodes. spain also has a great part of Italy in its possession,Naples. 
         viz. The Kingdom of Naples, who's Capital
City is scarce bridled by three Castles. The sovereignty
of siena, and a great many strong sea-ports,
and the sea-coasts of Tuscany, viz. Orbitello, Porto
Hercule, Telamone, Monte Argentario, Porto Longone,
and the Castle of Piombino; besides that noble Dukedom
of Milan,
         Milan. which is the Paradise of Italy, as Italy
is commonly called the Paradise of Europe: They
have also the Harbour of Final upon the Genouese
Coast. In the City of Milan, Trade and Manufactory
flourishes extreamly, and this Dukedom is much valued
by the spaniards, because they have thereby a
convenient Correspondence with the House of Austria. 
As long as Burgundy and the Netherlands were united,The Netherlands. 
they might be compared to a Kingdom; but now Burgundy
is lost, the seven united Provinces have separated
themselves from the rest of the Netherlands, and
France has conquered a great part of the remainder. 
And tho' in the spanish Netherlands there are very
fair and strong Cities left, yet nevertheless it seems,
that the greatest benefit which spain receives from
them amounts to this, That by them the French
Arms are diverted from the other spanish Territories,
that they commonly draw the seat of War thither,
and serve to take off the edge of the French Fury. In
the East Indies the Philippine Islands belong to the spaniards,
         The Philippine Islands. 
whose Capital City being Manilla, was taken
by them in the Year 1565: but these Islands are so
inconsiderable, that it has been often under debate,
whether it were not most convenient to abandon
them: Yet some Indian Commodities, which from

several places, and especially from China are brought
to Manilla, are from thence transported to New-spain
and Mexico, whereby there is kept a constant
Communication betwixt the spanish West and East
Indies. 
        §. 19. From what has been said it is evident,strength and Weakness of spain. 
          that
spain is a potent Kingdom, which has under its Jurisdiction,
rich and fair Countries, abounding with all
Necessaries, not only sufficient for the use of its Inhabitants,
but also affording a great overplus for Exportation. 
The spaniards also do not want Wisdom in
managing their state Affairs, nor Valour to carry on
a War: Nevertheless this vast Kingdom has its Infirmities,
which have brought it so low, that it is scarce
able to stand upon its own Legs: Among those is to
be esteemed one, the want of Inhabitants in spain,
there being not a sufficient number both to keep in obedience
such great Provinces, and at the same time
to make Head against a potent Enemy; which want
is not easily to be repaired out of those Countries
which are under their subjection, since it is the Interest
of spain, rather to restrain the Courage of these
Inhabitants, for fear they should one time or another
take Heart, and shake off the spanish Yoak. And
whenever they raise some souldier in these Provinces,
they cannot trust them with the defence of their Native
Country, but are obliged to disperse them, by
sending them into other Parts, under the Command
only of spaniards: spain therefore is scarce able to
raise within it self, a sufficient number of souldiers for
the Guard and Defence of its frontier places: Wherefore,
whenever spain happens to have War with other
Nations, it is obliged to make use of Foreign souldiers,
and to raise those, is not only very chargeable but also
the King is not so well assured of their Faith, as of
that of his own subjects. The want of Inhabitants is
also one reason, why spain cannot now-a-days keep a
considerable Fleet at sea, which nevertheless is extreamly
necessary to support the Monarchy of that
Kingdom. Another weakness is, That the spanish
Provinces are mightily dis-joined, they being divided

by vast seas and Countries: These therefore cannot be
maintained and governed without great difficulty;
for the Governours of the Provinces being remote from
the sight of the Prince, he cannot take so exact an
account of their Actions; and the oppressed subjects
want often opportunity to make their Complaints to
the King; besides that, Men and Money are with
great charge and danger sent out of spain into these
Provinces, without hopes of ever returning into the
Kingdom. Their strength cannot be kept together,
as being obliged to divide their Forces. The more disjoined
these Provinces are, the more frontier Garrisons
are to be maintained; all which may be saved in a
Kingdom, whose parts are not so much dis-joined. 
They are also liable to being attacked in a great many
places at once, one Province not being able to assist
another: Besides this, America being the Treasury of
spain, is parted from it by the vast Ocean, whereby
their silver Fleets are subject to the hazard of the seas
and Pyrates. And if it happens that such a Fleet is
lost, the whole Government must needs suffer extreamly
by the want of it, the Inhabitants of spain
being so exhausted, as not to be able to raise sufficient
summs to supply the Publick Necessities. The spaniards
are also mighty deficient in regulating their
West India Trade, which is so ill managed, that the
greatest part of those Riches are conveyed to other
Nations, whereby they are empoured to chastise spain
with its own Money. After the death of Philip II. it
has also proved very prejudicial to spain, that by the
carelessness of the succeeding Kings, and during the long
Minority of this present, the Nobles have so increased
their Power, that they are now very backward in
duely assisting the King, and by impoverishing the
King and Commonalty have got all the Riches to
themselves. It is also a common Disease in all Governments,
where the Popish Religion has got the
upper hand, That the Popish Clergy is very rich and
potent, and yet pretends, by a Divine Right, to be
exempted from all publick burdens, except that some
of them in the utmost extremity vouchsafe to contribute
some small portion for the defence of the whole,

but that not without consent of the Pope: Yet the
King of spain has that Prerogative, which he obtained
from Pope Hadrian IV. that he has the disposal of
all the chief Church Benefices in his Kingdom; and he
is also Head and Master of all the Ecclesiastical Orders
of Knighthood in spain. And because the Kings
of spain have hitherto pretended to be the most zealous
Protectours of the Papal Chair and Religion,
they have thereby so obliged the Zealots of the Roman
Catholick Religion, and especially the Jesuits, that
these have always been endeavouring to promote the
Interest of spain. 
        §. 20. Lastly,In what condition spain is in, in reference to its Neighbours, and especially as to Barbary. 
          It is also worth our observation,
how spain does behave it self in relation to its Neighbours,
and what Good or Evil it may again expect
from them. spain therefore is opposite to the Coast
of Barbary, having also several Forts on that side, viz. 
Pegnon de Velez, Oran, Arzilla, and would be better
if they had also Algiers and Tunis. From hence spain
need not fear any thing now, since it has quite freed it
self from the very Remnants of the Moors: But the Pyracies
committted by those Corsaires is not so hurtfull
to spain, as to other Nations, who traffique with spain,
Italy or Turky; for the spaniards seldom export their
own Commodities into the other parts of Europe, but
these are exported by other Nations. Turky. The Turks
seem to be pretty near to the Islands of sicily and sardinia,
and to the Kingdom of Naples: Yet are they
not much feared by the spaniards; the sea which
lies betwixt them being an obstacle against making a
Descent with a considerable Army in any of those
Parts; and if an Army should be landed, its Provisions,
which must come by sea, might easily be cut
off: For in such a case all the states of Italy would
be obliged to side with the spaniards to keep this
cruel Enemy from their Borders, and their Naval
strength joined together, much surpasses the Turks in
every respect. Italian states. 
          From the Italian states, the spaniards
have little to fear, it being a maxim with them, to
preserve the Peace of Italy, thereby to take away all
opportunity from France to get a footing in Italy,
         
which is also a general maxim among all the states
of Italy: Nevertheless this is most certain, That if
spain should endeavour to encroach upon the rest of
the Italian states, they would unanimously oppose it;
and if they should find themselves too weak to oppose
their Designs, they might be easily wrought upon to
call France to their aid. The Pope. The Pope, perhaps, might
be willing enough to be Master of the Kingdom of
Naples, spain holding the same in Fief of the Papal
Chair, and thereby the Popes might have a fresh opportunity
to enrich their Kindred: But the Pope
wants Power to execute such a Design, and the rest
of the states of Italy would not be forward to see so
considerable a Country added to the Ecclesiastical
state; and the Pope's Kindred are more for gathering
of Riches out of the present Ecclesiastical Revenues,
than to bestow the same upon an uncertain War. On
the other side, spain having found it very beneficial
for its Interest, to pretend to the chief Protectorship
of the Roman Religion, and that the Pope's good or
bad Inclinations towards it, may either prove advantageous
or disadvantageous, spain has always endeavoured
by all means to keep fair with the Popes. 
France, on the contrary, having taken part with the
Protestants, whom spain and the House of Austria
have sought to oppress, has demonstrated sufficiently
to the Roman Court, that it is not so fond of that Religion,
as to neglect an opportunity to enrich himself
with the Possessions of the Protestants, and to make
way for attaining to the so long projected Design of the
Universal Monarchy; which done, he might easily
make the Pope his Chaplain: Wherefore the chief aim
of the wisest Popes has been, to keep the Power of
spain and France in an equal Balance, this being the
most proper method to keep up the Authority and
provide for the security of the Popedom. It being
the principal maxim of the Venetians,
         Venice. to reserve their
Liberty and state, by maintaining the Peace of Italy,
spain has no reason to be jealous of them as long as it
undertakes nothing against them. It is also the Interest,
as well of them as of all the other Italian states,
that the spaniards remain in possession of Milan, for

fear, if France should become Master of this Dukedom,
it might thereby be put in a way to conquer
all the rest of Italy. On the other side, if spain should
shew the least Inclination to undertake any thing against
the Liberty of Italy, it cannot expect, but that
the Venetians, if not by an open War, at least, by
their Counsels and Money would oppose it: For the
rest, this state endeavours to remain Neuter betwixt
France and spain, and to keep fair with both of them,
as long as they do not act against their Interest; Genoua
is of great consequence to the spaniards,
         Genouae. from
which, depends in a great measure, the security and
Preservation of the Milaneze: Wherefore, when
Charles V. could not effect his Intention of building
a Castle (being opposed therein by Andreas Doria)
whereby he intended to make the Genoueses dance after
his Pipe, the spaniards found out another way to
make them dependent on their Interest, by borrowing
vast summs of Money from the Genoueses upon the
security of the King's Revenues in spain. Besides
this, they are possessed of the Harbour of Final on the
Coast of Genoua, whereby they have taken away the
power from them of cutting off the Correspondency
betwixt spain and Milan. spain has great reason to
give in a good Correspondency with savoy;
         savoy. for if that
Prince should side with France against it, the Milaneze
would be in eminent danger of being lost. But
because it would be very pernicious for savoy, if the
King of France should become Master of Milan,
since savoy would be then surrounded on all sides by
the French, it is easie for spain to maintain a good
Correspondency with savoy. Florence and the rest of
the Italian Princes have all the reason to be cautious
how to offend spain, yet, as much as in them lies,
they would scarce suffer spain to encroach upon any of
them. It is also of consequence to the spaniards to
live in friendship with the suiss,
         The suiss. partly because they
must make use of such souldiers as are listed among
them; partly because they may be very serviceable in
preserving the Milaneze; and their Friendship is best
preserved by Money. But, because the suiss are of
several Religions, spain is in greater Authority with

the Roman Catholick Cantons, but France with the
Protestant Cantons, which being the most potent, yet
have, either cajolled by fair Words, or Money, or
out of Fear, connived at the Frenches becoming Masters
of the County of Burgundy in the last War,
whereas formerly they used to take effectual care for
its preservation. Holland. The Hollanders were before the Peace
of Munster the most pernicious Enemies to spain;
but since the Conclusion of that Peace there is no
cause that spain should fear any thing from them,
since I do not see any reason, why these should attack
spain, or endeavour to take any thing from them,
having enough to do to maintain what they have already
got. And, if they should be tempted to attempt
any thing against the West Indies, they would
not only meet with great resistance from the spaniards
there, but also France and England would not easily
suffer, that both the East and West Indies, the two
Fountains from whence such vast Riches are derived,
should be in possession of the Dutch: And the Dutch,
as for their own Interests, obliged to take care, that
France, by swallowing up the rest of the Netherlands,
may not become their next Neighbour on the Land,
or that it should obtain any considerable advantage against
spain. 
         German•. The Power of Germany spain may consider
as its own, as far as the same depends on the House
of Austria. And it is not long ago, since the states
of Germany were persuaded to take upon them afresh
the Guaranty of the Circle of Burgundy; whereby
spain hoped to have united its Interest with that of the
German Empire against France; since, whenever a
War happens betwixt these two Crowns, it is scarce
possible, that this Circle should escape untouched, it
being the most convenient place where they may attack
one another with vigour. England. 
         England is capable of
doing most damage to the spaniards at sea, and especially
in the West Indies: But England, in all likelyhood,
would be no great gainer by it, since the English
have a vast Trade with the spanish sea-ports, and
their Trade in the Levant would suffer extreamly from
the spanish Privateers; but also Holland could not
look with a good Eye upon these Conquests of the

         English. 
         Portugal. 
         Portugal, by it self, cannot much hurt spain,
but in conjunction with another Enemy, it is capable
of making a considerable Diversion at home. 
But the Portugueses could not propose any considerable
Advantages to themselves thereby; and it
might easily happen, that Holland siding with spain
might take from hence an opportunity to drive the
Portugueses quite out of the East Indies. The King
of France,
         France. therefore, is the capital and most formidable
Enemy to spain, who wanting not Power, not
only longs to devour the rest of the Netherlands,
but also aims at the Conquest of other parts of spain. 
But if the old Maxims of Policy are not grown quite
out of date, it is to be hoped, that all who have any
Interest in the preservation of spain, will with all
their power endeavour to prevent, that the ruin of
spain, the Liberty and Possessions of all the states in
Europe may not depend on the Pleasure and Will of
one single person. What may be the consequence of the Extinction of the Royal Family. But what Revolution may happen
in spain if the present Royal Family, which has
no Heirs yet, should fail, is beyond Human Understanding
to determine or foresee; because it is to be
feared, that upon such an occasion, not only France
would do its utmost to obtain it, but also, because
several states which were annexed to spain, by the
Royal Family, might take an opportunity to withdraw
themselves from the same. "
"8","CHAP. III. Of Portugal. §. 1. POrtugal,
         The Origin of the Kingdom of Portugal. 
          which comprehends the greatest part
of that Province which the Romans called
Lusitania, fell, with the rest of spain, under the last
Gothick King Roderick, into the Hands of the Moors,
who were in possession of it for a long time; but in
the Year 1093, Alfonsus VI. King of Castile and Le
           •n,
arming himself with all his Power to attack the

         Moors; and craving also the Assistance of Foreign
Princes, among others; also, came one Henry, to signalize
himself in this War, whose Pedigree is variously
related by the Historians. For some will have him
descended out of the House of Burgundy, and have
made him a younger son of Robert Duke of Burgundy,
whose Father was Robert King of France, son of
Hugh Capet. Others derive his Pedigree from the
House of Loraine, alledging, That the reason of his
being called a Burgundian was, because he was born
at Besanson. 
         Henry Earl of Portugal. To this Henry, King Alfonsus VI. gave
in marriage his natural Daughter Theresia, as a reward
of his Valour, giving unto him for a Dowry, under
the Title of an Earldom, all that part of Portugal
which was then in the possession of the Christians;
which comprehended that part of the Country, where
are the Cities of Braga, Coimbria, Visco, Lamego, and
Porto, as also that tract of Ground which is now called
Tralos Montes, granting to him also a power to
conquer the rest of that Country, as far as to the River
of Guadiana, and to keep it under his Jurisdiction;
yet with these conditions, That he should be a Vassal
of spain, repair to the Dyets of that Kingdom, and
in case of a War, be obliged to serve with 300 Horse. 
Henry died in the Year 1112,Alfonsus I. King of Portugal. leaving a son whose
name was Alfonsus, being then very young: His Inheritance
was, during his Minority, usurped by Ferdinand
Potz, Count of Trastamara, his Father-in-law,
he having married his Mother. But as soon as he was
grown up, he took up Arms against his Father-in-law,
beat him out of Portugal, but his Mother he put in
Prison; who calling to her aid Alfonsus VII. he promised
to dis-inherit her son, and to give him all Portugal. 
But Alfonsus of Portugal defeated the Castilians
in a Battel, by which Victory he pretended to
have freed himself from the spanish subjection. 1126. This
Alfonsus undertook an Expedition against King Ismar,
         1139. 
who had his Kingdom on the other side of the River
Tajo, who being joined by the Forces of four other petty
Moorish Kings, drew out against him. Alfonsus was
then in his Camp near Cabebas des Reyes proclaimed
King, thereby to animate his souldiers; and get a

most signal Victory,The Origin of the five shields in the Arms of Portugal. 
          taking the five standards of those
Kings, whence he put five shields in the Arms of
Portugal, and retained ever after the Title of King. 
He took afterwards a great many Cities from the
Moors; and among the rest, with the assistance of
the Netherland Fleet the City of Lisbon in the Year
1147. 1179. This Alfonsus was taken Prisoner near Badajoz,
by Ferdinand King of Egypt, who gave him his
Freedom without any other Ransom, than that he
was to restore to him some Cities, which he had taken
from him in Gallicia. After he had reigned very
gloriously, and greatly enlarged the Limits of his
Kingdom,1185. he died in the 91st Year of his Age. §. 2. Him succeeded his son sanctius,
         sanctius I. who built
a great many Cities, and filled them with Inhabitants. 
He took from the Moors the City of selva, being assisted
in that Expedition, by a Fleet sent out of the
Netherlands to the Holy Land. He was, during his
whole Reign, always in action with the Moors, and
died in the Year 1212. Alfonsus II. After him reigned his son Alfonsus
sirnamed Crassus, who did nothing worth
mentioning, but that, with the help of the Netherlanders,
who went to the Holy Land, he took from the
Moors the City of Alcassar. He died in the Year 1223. 
His son sanctius,
         sanctius II. sirnamed Capellus, succeeded him;
who being very careless, and ruled by his Wife, was
excluded from the Administration of the Government
by the Portugueses, who conferred it on Alfonsus his
Brother. sanctius died an Exile in Toledo. The Portugueses
have made this observation concerning him,1246. 
that he was the only Portuguese King who died without
leaving either Legitimate Children or Bastards behind
him. Alfonsus III. 
         Alfonsus, the Brother of sanctius, parted
from his Lady Mathildis, Countess of Boulogne, she
being somewhat Ancient and Barren, and married
Beatrice, Daughter to Alfonsus X. King of Castile,
with whom he had for a Dowry the County of Algarbia;
but the Pope being dissatisfied with this Divorce,
excommunicated both him and the whole
Kingdom. He reigned very laudably, and united a
great many Cities to his Kingdom, and died in the

Year 1279. The extraordinary Virtues of his son
Dionysius,
         Dionysius. especially, Justice, Liberality and Constancy,
are highly extolled by the Portugueses: He having
also adorned the Kingdom with a great many publick
Buildings, among which is the Academy of Conimbria,
first founded by him. There is an old Proverb
concerning him, used among the Portugueses, El Rey
D. Denys, qui fiz quanto quin: King Dionysius, who
did whatsoever he pleased. He died in the Year 1325;
his son. Alfonsus IV. Alfonsus IV. sirnamed the Brave, was very
glorious for his Atchievements both in Peace and War;
but he banished his Bastard Brother, who was greatly
beloved both by his Father and the People; and
caused D. Agnes de Castro, a very beautiful Lady,
who was without his consent married to his son Pieter,
barbarously to be murthered; which so exasperated
Pieter, that he taking up Arms against the Father,
did considerable mischief, till at last the business was
composed. Pieter. He died in the Year 1357. His son Pieter
was commonly called the Cruel, tho' some will
have this rather to have been spoken to his praise, as
having been an exact observer of Justice, never sparing
any Offender. He died in the Year 1368. His
son Ferdinand contended with Henry the Bastard,Ferdinand. who
had murthered his Brother Pieter, sirnamed the Cruel,
King of Castile, about the Kingdom of Castile, because
his Mother Beatrice had been Daughter of sanctius
IV. King of Castile; and a great many of the
Nobility and some Cities of that Kingdom declaring
for him, he waged War against the forementioned
Henry. But he being too strong for him, he could not
maintain his Pretensions, but was obliged to make
Peace. 1373. However the War broke out afresh again betwixt
them, because Ferdinand had protected some
who were banished out of Castile for High Treason,
neither would, upon demand, surrender them. To
revenge this, Henry made an inrode into Portugal, and
finding no resistance, over-ran the greatest part of the
Country. After the death of Henry, Ferdinand made
a Peace with his son John, but the same was soon violated
again by the Portugueses, who encouraged the
Duke of Lancaster, that married Constantia Daughter

of Pieter King of Castile, to pretend to the Crown of
Castile: He came with a good Army into Portugal;
but the English being quickly grown weary of the
War in spain, and living very disorderly in Portugal,
a Peace was concluded on both sides. At last Ferdinand
married his Daughter Beatrice to John of Castile,
under condition, that such Children as were born of
their Bodies, should succeed in the Kingdom of Portugal;
which was afterwards the occasion of bloody
Wars. This Ferdinand, who by his frequent Wars
had proved very pernicious to Portugal, died in the
Year 1383, being the last of the true Race of the
Kings of Portugal. 
        §. 3. After the death of Ferdinand great Troubles
arose in Portugal,
         Interregnum. most of the Portugueses not being
able to brook living under the subjection of the Castilians,
whom they mortally hated. It was, 'tis
true, agreed on in the Articles of Marriage made betwixt
the King of Castile and Beatrice Daughter of
Ferdinand, That her Mother Eleonora should have the
Administration of the Government in Portugal, till
such Children as should be born of this Marriage
should be of age: But this Eleonora, leaving all to the
management of the Count of Ancira, her much suspected
Favourite, she drew upon her self the hatred of
the Portugueses. John, therefore, natural son of Pieter
King of Portugal, privately murthered him, whereby
he got both the Favour of the People, and encreased
the hatred against the Queen Dowager: But some
of the Portugueses being much dissatisfied at these proceedings,
begged the King of Castile,
         some call in the King of Castile. 
          to take upon
him the Crown of Portugal; which he might in all
likelyhood have obtained, if he had been quick enough,
either by fair means or by force, to have put
himself into full possession of the same: But he being
uncertain in his Resolutions, gave by his delays, time
and opportunity to the adverse Party to strengthen it
self. Wherefore, he coming without an Army into
Portugal, his Mother-in-law resigned to him the Government,
but he found but an indifferent Reception
among the Portugueses, they being very averse to him

because he used very rarely to speak or converse with
them: Nevertheless a great many of the Nobility and
some Cities did side with him; but most out of a hatred
to the Castilians, chose for their Leader John the
Bastard, a wise and brave Man, and much beloved by
the People. The Castilians thereupon besieged Lisbon,
but their Army being for the most part destroyed by
the Plague, they were obliged to leave it without having
got any advantage. 1385. In the Year next following,
the Portugueses declared this John their King,John the Bastard. who very
courageously attacked those places, which had declared
for the Castilians, and subdued the greatest part
of them. The Castilians then entred with an Army
into Portugal, but were entirely routed by this new
King near Aliubarotta, which Victory is yearly celebrated
to this day among the Portugueses. After this
Battel, all the rest of the Cities did without more adoe
surrender themselves to the new King. The Portugueses
also calling unto their aid, the Duke of Lancaster,
unto whom they had promised the Crown of
Castile, they entered into that Kingdom with an Army:
But the English having suffered extreamly by
sickness, the Duke of Lancaster thought it most convenient
to conclude a Peace with the Castilians, whereupon
it was agreed, That the son of the King of Castile
should marry his only Daughter Catharine, which he
had by Constantia, Daughter to Pieter King of Castile. 
A Truce was also made betwixt Portugal and
Castile at that time; but the War soon breaking out
again,1399. at last, an everlasting Peace was concluded betwixt
both Kingdoms; so that John had the good fortune
to maintain himself in the possession of the Crown
of Portugal, and reigned with great applause. After
he was quietly settled in the Throne, he undertook an
Expedition into Africa, and took the City Ceuta;
whose son also first found out the Isle of Madera. 
         1415. 
This King died in the Year 1433,1420. and left a Memory
that is to this day dear to the Portugueses. 
        §. 4. Edward. His son Edward was a very Virtuous Prince,
but did not reign long; for at that time, Portugal being
over-run with the Plague, he got the Infection by a

Letter, and died in the Year 1438. During his Reign,
his Brothers undertook a most unfortunate Expedition
into Africa, where being themselves taken Prisoners
before Tangier, they promised to restore to the
Moors Ceuta for a Ransom, leaving Don Ferdinand
as a Hostage behind them. But the states of Portugal
refusing to stand to the Contract, the Hostage was
forced to end his days in Prison. Alfonsus V. 
         Alfonsus, son to this
Edward, was but six years old when his Father died,
whose Tuition was committed, by his Father's last
Will, to his Mother. But the states, refusing to submit
themselves to the Government of a Foreign Woman,
conferred the Administration of the Kingdom on
Don Pedro Duke of Conimbria, Brother to King Edward,
but he received a very slender Recompence for
his services; for being falsely accused before the new
King, he was slain as he was going with some Troops
to the King to justifie himself. Alfonsus V. was else a very
good souldier and a brave Prince, under whose Reign the
Portugueses took several places on the Coast of Africa,
viz. Tangier, Arcilla, Alcassar, and some others. 
Good store of Gold was also transported out of Guinea
into Portugal, which he emploied in coining of
Cruisadoes. After this Alfonsus had great contests
with Ferdinand the Catholick and Isabella, there being
a promise of marriage made betwixt him and Johanna,
the supposed Daughter of Henry IV. King of Castile;
but, as it was reported, begotten in Adultery; but
the Marriage was not consummated, she being Alfonsus's
sister's Daughter, tho', at last, the Pope gave his
Dispensation, which he had refused at first. Alfonsus,
under this pretence, took upon himself the Title and
Arms of Castile, surprising several Cities, assisted by
some of the Nobility of Castile, who sided with him:
Lewis XI. also, King of France, sent him some Auxiliaries,
but these were not sufficient to enable him to
undertake any thing of moment: Wherefore, Ferdinand
retaking all the places from the Portugueses,
routed them also near Toro and near Albuhera;
         1476. so that
Alfonsus despairing of obtaining his Ends,1479. concluded
a Peace with Ferdinand, wherein he renounced both
Castile and the Bride Johanna, she being promised in

marriage to John son of Ferdinand, who was then a
Child: But she, perceiving that this was only done to
elude her,1479. went into a Nunnery. Portugal sustained
considerable losses in this War, and Alfonsus died in the
Year 1481, as it is supposed, out of Grief, because he
had lost the hopes of his Bride and the Crown of Castile. 
         John II. 
Him succeeded his son John II. against whom
a most horrid Conspiracy was discovered, for which
Ferdinand Duke of Braganza, and James Duke of
Visco lost their lives, the latter being killed by the
King's own Hand. This King John was the first,
who found out the way to sail into the East Indies,
         A Project of sailing to the East Indies. 
         
having not only ordered an exact survey to be made
of the African Coast, as far as to the Cape of good hope,
but also sent some by Land into the East Indies, to
inform themselves concerning the Condition of those
Countries. He built also the Castle of Mina on the
Coast of Guinea: But before this intended Voyage to
the East Indies could be begun, this King died in the
Year 1495, leaving no Heirs behind him. §. 5. Emanuel. 
         John II. was succeeded by his Cousin Emanuel,
son of Ferdinand Duke of Visco, Grandchild of King
Edward. With him contended for the succession the
Emperour Maximilian, whose Mother Eleonora was a
Daughter of King Edward: But the Portugueses declared
for Emanuel, who for his extraordinary Qualifications
both of Body and Mind, was extreamly beloved
by them. He, the better to establish himself
at home, married Isabella, eldest Daughter of Ferdinand
the Catholick, out of which marriage a young
Prince was born, whose Name was Michael, who, if
he had lived, would have been Heir to all the spanish
Kingdoms,Moors and Jews banished out of Portugal. 
          except that of Navarre. To please his
Bride, he, by his Proclamation, banished all the Jews
and Moors out of Portugal by a prefixed time, under
penalty, for all such as should stay behind, to be
made slaves for ever. Whereupon the Moors immediately
retired into Africa; but from the Jews they
took their Children which were under the Age of
fourteen, and baptized them against their Will: And
as for the old ones, they were so plagued and vexed

every where, and stopped or hindered in their Journeys,
that most, to be rid of these Vexations, and to avoid
the danger of slavery, were baptized, retaining, nevertheless,
in their Minds, their ancient superstition:
Under the Reign of this King, Portugal arrived to the
highest pitch of its Greatness,The first seavoyage into the East Indies. 
          the design of the East-India
Voyage round Africa, which was projected by
the former King, being now accomplished by Vascus
de Gama,
         1497. who first arrived at Calicut. As soon as
the Portugueses began to draw into their Country
the Trade of spices, they were opposed, especially by
the sultan of Egypt, because formerly these Commodities
used to be conveyed through Egypt to Venice,
and from thence to other parts of Europe, from which
both these Countries drew vast Profit. Wherefore
the Venetians stirred up the sultan,The reason why the Venetians opposed the Portugueses settling themselves there. sending him great
stores of Metal to make Cannons of, and shipwrights to
build ships; by which means they hoped to drive the
Portugueses out of the Indies: But the Portugueses,
who did not much trust the Barbarian Kings of the
Indies, began to build Forts and strong Holds in the
most convenient places; wherein they met with little
opposition, partly because the Indians were terrified
by the vastness of the ships, and the thunder of the
Cannons of the Europeans; partly because they were
not aware of what consequence they might prove one
day against them. The Progress of the Duke •f Albuquerque in the East Indies. 
          The Duke of Albuquerque, especially,
did mightily advance the Power of the Portugueses
in the Indies, who took the Cities of Ormuz,
Malacca, Cochin and Goa; the latter of which is the
place of Residence of the Portuguese Governour in
the Indies. And thus the Portugueses engrossed to
themselves the whole Trade and Commerce of Africa
and the remotest parts of Asia, having possessed themselves
of all the most commodious Ports and Places
not only on the Western side of Africa, in Mauritania,
Guinea, Congo, Angola, in the Isle of st. Thomas,
and some others, but also on the East side, in Manzambique,
Melinde, Mombazo, Zafala, and from the
mouth of the Red sea, as far as Japan; from whence
incredible Riches were conveyed into Portugal. Besides
all this did Pieter Alvanus Capralis, or as some

will have it Americus Vesputius discovered the Country
of Brasile in America,
         The discovery of Brasil in America. 
          whither the Portugueses sent
1500 several Colonies. And under the Reign of this
King Emanuel, who died in the Year 1521, Portugal
increased to that degree, that his Reign was called,
The Golden Age. 
         John III. After him reigned his son John III. 
under whose Reign Portugal continued in the same
flourishing condition. The Jesuites sent to the Indies. 
          This King sent Francis Xavier,
and some other Jesuites into the East Indies, who
were to settle the Christian Religion among the Barbarians. 
The Jesuites commonly boast of great numbers
of Heathens converted by them, but whether
they deserve an intire credit in this, or whether,
perhaps, a great many of these have not rather taken
upon them the Name, than the Faith of Christians,
those are best able to judge, who have been conversant
in those places. He died in the Year 1557. §. 6. sebastian. 
         John III. had for his successour his Grandson
sebastian, a Child of three Years of age, whose Tuition
was committed to the Cardinal Henry, his Uncle,
because his Grandmother was not willing to take upon
her the burthen of the Government. Through the
over-forwardness of this young Prince, Portugal received
such a blow, that it fell from the Pinacle of its
Greatness: For some of his Court Favourites did put
this magnanimous and ambitious Prince, upon such
Enterprizes as were far surpassing both his Age and
Power, and were in no ways suitable to the present
juncture of Affairs, so that his whole Mind was bent
upon Warlike Exploits, and how by Martial Exercises,
to revive the ancient Valour of his subjects, which by
Peace and Plenty, having been more addicted to
Commerce, was of late much decaied. He undertook,
therefore, an Expedition into the next adjacent
parts of Africa, intending, by light skirmishes to try
his Enemies. He proposed, afterwards, a Voyage into
the Indies, but his Council opposing it, it was agreed
upon, that he should undertake an Expedition
into Africa, an occasion presenting it self at that time;
for that Muley Mahomet, King of Morocco, being
banished by his Uncle Muley Malucco, craved the assistance

of King sebastian: Wherefore, notwithstanding
the good Counsels of Philip King of spain,
         His fatal Expedition into Africa. 
          and
others, who dissuaded him from it, he in person,
with a great but unexercised Army entered Africa, and
advancing, against all Reason, too far into the Country,
was obliged, in a disadvantageous place, to fight
against a much more numerous Army; wherefore the
success of the Battel was answerable to the rash attempt;
his Army, wherein was the flower of the Nobility
of Portugal, being miserably routed, and the
souldiers all either cut to pieces or made Prisoners. 
This Battel is famous, because three Kings fell, viz. 
King sebastian, the banished Muley Mahomet, and
Muley Malucco, King of Morocco, who during the
time of the Battel, died of a Fever. This happened
in the Year 1578. Henry. Him succeeded his Uncle Henry
the Cardinal, a very old Man, under whose Reign
there happened nothing worth mentioning, but that
perpetual contests were set on foot concerning the succession. 
Wherefore, he dying in the Year 1580, Philip
II. King of spain, thought it the most efficacious
way, to dispute with the sword in hand; and perceiving
that the Portugueses, out of that hatred which they
bare to the Castilians, were inclined to Anthony son of
Lewis de Beya, natural son to King John III. he sent the
Duke d'Alba with a great Army into Portugal, who
quickly chased away Anthony, and in few days became
Master of the whole Kingdom,Portugal united to spain. all being forced soon to
submit, except the Isle of Tercera, which was not
reduced till after the French, who came to its relief,
were beaten. As the Portugueses did not, without
great reluctancy, bear the Government of the Castilians;
so this Union with Castile proved very prejudicial
to them afterwards. For Philip, who was for bringing
the Netherlanders again under Obedience,
thought that nothing could do it more effectually,
than to stop their Trade and Commerce with spain
and Portugal: For hitherto they had traded no further,
being used to fetch away their Commodities from
thence, and to convey them into the more Northern
parts of Europe. Wherefore Philip concluded, that if
this way of getting Money were once stoped, they

would quickly grow poor, and thereby be obliged to
submit themselves. But this design had a quite contrary
effect;The Dutch sail to the East Indies. 
          for the Hollanders being themselves excluded
from Trade with spain and Portugal, tried, about
the end of the latter Age, to sail to the East Indies. 
And as soon as, after a great many difficulties,
they had once gotten footing there, they greatly impaired
the Portugueses Trade, who hitherto had only
managed the same, and afterwards took from them one
Fort after another. 1620. And the English, with the assistance
of Abbas King of Persia, forced from them the famous
City of Ormutz. 
         1630. Nor was this all, for the Hollanders
took from them a great part of Brasile, and several
places on the Coast of Africa; which the Hollanders,
in all probability, would have had no reason to undertake,
if Portugal had remained a Kingdom by it self,
and had not been annexed to spain. 
        §. 7. But in the Year 1640,The Portuguese shake off the Yoak of spain. 
          the Portugueses took
an occasion to shake off the spanish Yoak. For Philip
IV. then summoned the Portuguese Nobility to assist
him in the War against the Catalonians, who had
rebelled against him. Being therefore armed, and
finding an opportunity to consult with one another,
concerning those Troubles in which spain was involved
at that time; they agreed to withdraw themselves
from the subjection of spain,
         The Duke of Braganz•
           proclaimed King. proclaiming for their
King,John IV. the Duke of Braganza, who stiled himself
John IV. whose Grandmother had stood in competition
with Philip II. for that Crown. The spaniards
committed a gross mistake in this, that they did not
in time secure the Duke, whom they knew to have a
fair pretence to that Crown; to be extreamly beloved
by that Nation, and to be in possession of the
fourth part of the Kingdom. The spaniards being at
that time entangled in Wars against France, Holland
and Catalonia; the Portugueses had thereby good leisure
given them, to settle their Affairs. They made
also a Peace with Holland,
         〈◊〉 League between Portugal and Holland. 
          by virtue of which, both
Parties were to remain in possession of what they had
gotten. But this Peace did not last long; for, these
places which were in the possession of the Hollanders,
         
in Brasile, revolted to the Portugueses, which the Hollanders
looking upon as done by contrivance of the
Portugueses,
         A War breaks cut betwixt them. denounced War against them. And tho'
they did not retake Brasile, yet did they take a great
many other places from them in the East Indies, viz. 
Malacca, the places on the Coast of the Isle of Zeylon,
on the Coast of Cormandel, and on the Coast of
Malabar, Cochin, Canaror, Cranganor, and some others;
and if they had not clapt up a Peace with
them,A Peace in 1661. they would in all likely hood have also driven
them out of Goa it self. John IV. died in the Year
1656,Alfonsus VI. leaving the Kingdom to his son Alfonsus, who
was under Age, but the Administration of the Government
was in the mean time lodged with his
Mother. After the Pyrenean Treaty was concluded,
out of which Portugal was excluded by the spaniards,
it being besides this agreed with France, not to send
any Assistances to the Portugueses, the spaniards fell
upon the Portugueses in good earnest: But these defended
themselves bravely, and notwithstanding the
Articles of the Pyrenean Treaty, the French King did
give leave to the Earl of schombergh, and a great many
other Frenchmen to enter into the service of the
Portugueses, who routed the spaniards in several Encounters,
but more especially, near Extremos and
Villa Vitiosa. 
         1668▪
          At last, the French entering with a great
Army into the Netherlands, the spaniards were willing
to conclude a Peace with the Portugueses, who
were also glad to be once disentangled out of so tedious
a War. By virtue of this Peace spain did resign
all its Pretensions upon Portugal. In the mean time
Alfonsus was grown up a wild and awkward sort of a
Man, as Don Pedro's Friends have represented him to
the World; who, besides this, by a Distemper which
he had in his tender Age, was so disabled both in his
Body and Mind, that he was neither fit to rule nor
marry: Yet he taking from his Mother the Administration
of Affairs upon himself (who quickly after
died) married a Princess of Nemours,
         1666. descended from
the House of savoy; who having lived with him about
sixteen Months, retired into a Monastery, desiring
to be divorced from him: she alledged, That

         Alfonsus was not only incapable of Matrimony, but
also that he had endeavoured, to have one of his Favourites
get her with Child, thereby to secure the
Crown to his Family. There was, besides this, so
strong a Jealousie betwixt the King and his Brother
Don Pedro, that the latter thought his Life to be in
danger, if he did not prevent the Designs of his Brother
and his Favourites: He therefore, bringing the
Nobility and People over to his Party, forced Alfonsus
to surrender to him the Administ••••on of the Kingdom,
reserving for his Maintenance only the yearly
Revenue of 270000 Livers, as also the Palace of Braganza,
with all its Appurtenances. Don Pedro. 
         Don Pedro would
not take upon himself the Title of King, but chose
rather to be called Regent of Portugal, in the name
of his Brother Alfonsus, he being incapable of Administring
the Government: He married also upon the
desire of the Portugueses, and with the Dispensation of
the Pope, his Brother's Wife. And because Alfonsus
should not be in a capacity of raising any disturbances,
he was under a good Guard conducted into the Island
of Ter••ra. But Don Pedro has hitherto administred
the Government in peace, and to the general satisfaction
of the People. §. 8. The Humours of the Portugueses. 
          And to say something concerning the Genius
of the Portugueses, and the strength and the Nature
of the Country. The Portugueses are not inferiour
to the spaniards in Pride and Haughtiness; but
are not esteemed so Prudent and Cautious as these,
but are over-secure in Prosperity, and in time of danger
rash and fool-hardy. Where they get the upperhand
they are very rigorous and cruel. They are
mightily addicted to be Covetous, and love Usury,
and have searched after Money in all corners of the
World. some also will have them to be very Malicious,
which they say is the remnant of the Jewish
Blood, which is intermingled with that of the Portuguese
Nation. This Country, considering its bigness,
is very populous, as is evident by the number of Portugueses,
which have settled themselves in Brasile, on
the Coast of Africa, and in the East Indies: Yet are

they not in a capacity to raise a numerous Land Army
without Foreign help, or to man out a mighty
Fleet of Men of War; but they have enough to do,
to Garrison their frontier Places well, and to keep
Convoys for their Merchant ships. §. 9. Fruitfulness of Portugal. 
          Concerning the Countries which belong nowa-days
to Portugal. The Kingdom of Portugal, by it
self considered, is neither very large nor very fruitfull,
the Inhabitants living most upon such Corn as is imported:
Yet is the Country full of Cities and Towns,
and has a great many commodious sea-ports. The
Commodities of the growth of Portugal, fit for Exportation,
are salt, of which a great quantity is from
setubal or st. Hubes transported into the Northern
Countries: As also Oyl, some Wine, and all sorts of
Fruit. The other Commodities which are brought
from thence they first, have from those Provinces that
belong to them. The silver Mine called Guacaldane,
is said to be of the yearly value of 178 Quentoes of
silver (each Quent being reckoned to amount to 2673
Ducats, 8 Reals, and 26 Marvedoes. ) Among those
Countries that now belong to Portugal the chiefest is
Brasile,
         Brasile, being a long tract of Land in America, extended
all along the sea side, but very narrow, and
famous for the wholsomness of the Air, and its Fertility. 
Here abundance of sugar is made, from whence
arises the main Revenue of the Country, the Portugueses
making use of the same in preserving those excellent
Fruits as grow both in Portugal and Brasile. 
Brasile also affords Ginger, Cotton, Wooll, Indigo
and Wood for the Dyers. But because the Natives of
this Country are naturally lazy, who cannot by any
ways be forced to hard labour, the Portugueses buy
upon the Coast of Africa, and especially in Congo and
Angola, Negroes, whom they use for slaves, buying
and selling them in Brasile as we do Oxen; they are
employed in all sorts of hardships and drudgery. Africa. The
Trade of the Portugueses on the West side of Africa is
not now of any great consequence, since the Hollanders
have interfered with them; and those places
which they are possessed of on the East side of Africa
         
only serve to enrich their Governours. What the Hollanders
have left them in the East Indies is of no small
consequence to them;The East Indies. for Goa is a very large City,
where there is a great Trade among People of all
Nations: But the wiser fort do not approve of the Portuguese
Government in the East Indies; the Portugueses
there are given to Voluptuousness, and neglecting
Military Affairs, are so presumptuous, as to imagine,
that nevertheless with their haughty Carriage they
can out-brave others. Hence it was that the Hollanders
found it so easie to drive this Nation out of the greatest
part of the Indies, which was grown hatefull to
them all: Yet the Portugueses enjoy one Privilege which
the Dutch have not, that they are allowed a free Trade
with China, where they have the City of Macao in an
Island not far distant from the Continent; and they
have understood so to mis-represent the Hollanders
with the Chineses, that they, hitherto, as far as I
know, they have not been able to obtain a free Commerce
with China. 
         A horrible Persecution raised on the Christians of Japan▪
           and the occasion of It. Formerly the Portugueses had a
great Interest in Japan, which was chiefly procured
by means of the Jesuites, who made it their business
to convert the Japoneses to the Christian Religion. It
is related, that above 400000 of them were baptized,
not without hopes, that all the rest would at last have
followed their example. But about thirty years ago,
the Dutch, by their Practices and Artifices, rendered
the Portugueses suspected to the Emperour of Japan,
having intercepted a Letter from the Jesuits to
the Pope, wherein they promised to bring, ere long,
the whole Kingdom of Japan under the Obedience of
the Roman see. The Hollanders interpreted this Letter
in such a sense, as if the Jesuits, with the assistance
of the new Converts, did intend to dethrone the Emperour;
telling him, That the Pope pretended to an
Authority of disposing of Kingdoms at his pleasure,
and that the King of spain who was then Master of
Portugal, was in great esteem with him. The jealous
Japoneses were easily persuaded hereof, when they
considered with what Respect and Kindness the Jesuits
were treated by the new Christians; those being
also very ready to accept of what these good natured

People offered them. And the Governours were sensible,
and complained, that their usual Presents from
the subjects decreased daily, since the new Converts
gave so much to their Priests. The Hollanders also
shewed the Emperour of Japan in a Mapp, how the
Conquests of the King of spain did extend on one
side as far as Manilla, on the other side as far as Macao,
so that by subduing of Japan, he would have an
opportunity of uniting his Conquests. This occasioned
a most horrible Persecution against the Christians,
the Japoneses endeavouring by incredible Torments to
overcome the Constancy of a Nation, which is naturally
one of the most obstinate. Neither did they
cease, till there was not one Christian left in Japan,
and the Portugueses, upon pain of death, were for ever
banished the Country. And the Hollanders, when
afterwards they sent any ships to Japan, used to forbid
their subjects, to shew the least appearance of
Religious Christian Worship, but if they were asked,
Whether they were Christians, to answer, They were
not, but they were Hollanders. Lastly, To Portugal
belong also the Isles called Azores, whereof Tercera,
and the Isle Madera, which are tolerably fruitfull,
are the principal. §. 10. From what hath been said, it is apparent,The strength of Portugal. 
         
that the welfare of Portugal depends chiefly on their
Commerce with the East Indies, Brasile and Africa;
whereby also it is evident enough, that the strength and
Power of Portugal in comparison of the rest of the more
potent states of Europe is not to be esteemed such, as
to be able to attack any of them, or gain any thing
upon them. It is therefore the Interest of this Crown
to take care how to preserve it self in the same condition
as it is in now, and to be very cautious of engaging
it self in a War with any Nation that is potent at sea,
which perhaps might undertake something against
their Provinces abroad. How it stands with regard to spain. 
          But as for its Neighbours in
particular; Portugal is for the most part nearest unto
spain, so that it is easie for the spaniards to enter
Portugal, yet is the Power of spain not very dreadfull
to the Portugueses, partly, because the spaniards cannot

conveniently keep an Army of above 25000 Men
on foot on that side, by reason of the scarcity of Provisions;
the like number the Portugueses also can bring
into the Field; partly, because spain cannot man
out a considerable Fleet of Men of War wherewith
to attack the Portuguese Provinces: Besides, Portugal
in case of such an attack might certainly expect to be
assisted either by the French or English, who as much
as in them lies, will not suffer spain to become again
Master of Portugal. 
         To France. Neither does it appear for the Interest
of Portugal, upon the Instigation of France or
some other Foreign Power, to engage it self without
a pressing necessity in a War with spain, since it is not
probable that it could gain any thing considerable,
but would only weaken it self without the hopes of any
advantage: Portugal has, in all probability, not
much to fear from France, they lying at a considerable
distance from one another; besides this, the Naval
strength of France is not come, as yet, to that height,
as to be in a capacity to be hurtfull to a Nation that
has settled it self very securely in the East and West
Indies; and more especially, since these two Nations
have not any pretensions on each other: And it rather
concerns France that Portugal may stand secure
against spain and Holland. 
         To Holland. The Hollanders have hitherto
proved the most pernicious Enemies to Portugal,
they being in a capacity not only to disturb their
Trade on the Coast of Portugal, but also may prove
very troublesom to them both in the East and West
Indies: And it seems, that it would be no difficult
matter for the Hollanders, by taking from the Portugueses
the City of Macao, on the Coast of China, and
some other places on the Coast of Malabar, quite to
destroy their Trade in the East Indies. But it is probable,
that, in case of a War betwixt the Portugueses
and Hollanders, England would assist the former against
the latter, since it has not been without great
Displeasure to the English, to see what progresses the
Hollanders have made in the East Indies, whereby
they have acquired such vast Riches, that they have
•id defiance to England and all the rest of Europe. 
        "
"9","CHAP. IV. Of England. §. 1. IN Ancient Time,The ancient sate of England. 
          
         Britainy, which was then esteemed
the biggest Island of the World, was
not ruled by one Prince, but divided into a great many
petty states, each of them governed by its own
King; but this multitude of petty Princes, as it
caused great Divisions among them, so it exposed them
to the danger of being overcome by their Foreign Enemies. 
This Island was scarce known to the Greeks
and Romans till Julius Caesar's time, who, after he
had conquered the greatest part of France, undertook
an Expedition into this Island, hoping, as 'tis supposed,
to meet there with great Booty and Riches. But he
entered not very far into the Country, and after some
skirmishes with the Inhabitants, returned again without
leaving a Garrison, or exacting any Contributions. 
After this Britainy was not attacked again by the Romans,
till under the Reign of the Emperour Claudius,
who bent his Arms against it in good earnest, and
the Inhabitants being divided among themselves, and
not joined in a mutual defence against the common
Enemy,The Romans conquer England. he, without great difficulty, conquered part
of it. At which time Britainy was made a Roman
Province, a constant Army being maintained here by
the Romans, who by degrees conquered one part after
another, yet not without receiving some Defeats. At
last, under the Reign of Domitian, Julius Agricola
marched with his victorious Army through the whole
Island, and giving a signal overthrow to the Caledonians,
who are now called the scots, subdued them;
tho' the Romans could never entirely conquer the utmost
parts of Britainy, being almost inaccessible. 
Wherefore, afterwards the Emperours Adrian and severus,
by building a Wall cross the Island from sea to
sea, divided them from the Roman Province, hoping
thereby to stop their Incursions. But the Romans never
came into Ireland. After the Britains had been

above 400 Years under subjection to the Romans, the
Northern Nations at that time over-running the
Western parts of the Roman Empire, the Romans left
this Island voluntarily, being obliged to recall their
Legions, which were posted in Britainy, to oppose
their Enemies. §. 2. Britainy being thus without an Army,The saxons come into Britainy. 
          and
besides, this, mightily exhausted in its strength, for
that the Romans had made use of their young Men in
their Wars, the Picts and scots, from their barren
Country, made an Inrode into these plentifull Provinces,
destroying all before them. The English, to
make the better Head against them, had chosen one
Vortigern for their King; but he perceiving himself to
be no ways able to resist their Power; and Assistance
being denied him from the Romans, called in the Angles,
a saxon Nation, living then in Holstein: One part
of which retains that Name to this day, tho' some
will have them to have been Frieslanders, others Goths;
it being certain, that the mordern Language of the
Frieslanders has a great affinity with the ancient English
Tongue. These Angles, under their Leaders Hengist
and Horsa, coming with some thousands of Men
to the assistance of the Britains, beat out the scots. 
But they being mightily taken with the Fruitfulness
of the Country,•450. resolved to subdue it, and to lay the
Yoak upon the Britains, who had called them in to
deliver them from it. As soon as the Britains perceived
what their Intention was, they endeavoured to
drive them out of the Island; but these taking up
Arms, and calling in a great many thousands of their
Country-men to their assistance, first took from the
Britains the Eastern parts of the Island. And the
Western parts, which were yet in the possession of the
Britains, being afterwards extreamly wasted by
Plague and Famine, so that the British King Cadwalladar
retired into the lesser Britainy: The saxons
took hold of this opportunity, conquering all the rest
of Britainy, except the Province of Wales, which being
surrounded with Mountains, they were not able to
subdue. This abovementioned Cadwalladar was the

last King of the ancient British Race, who, perceiving
that he was no ways able, any longer, to resist the
Power of the saxons,
         689. retired to Rome, into a Convent. 
But Britainy received the Name of Anglia, or England,
from the Angles. 
        §. 3. These saxons erected seven Kingdoms,The saxon Kings in England. 
          which
however had not their beginning all at one time, but
according as they had taken one part after another
from the Inhabitants: At last they fell together by
the ears among themselves, till one having swallowed
up another, all were united into one Kingdom;
which, how it happened we will briefly relate. The
first Kingdom,The saxon Heptarchy. then, was that of Kent, which began
in the Year 455, and during the Reigns of seventeen
Kings, lasted till the Year 827, when it was subdued
by the West saxons. The second was the Kingdom
of sussex, which began in the Year 488, and, under
five Kings, lasted till the Year 601, when it was likewise
made a Province by the West saxons. The third
was that of the West saxons, which began in the Year
519, and lasted, under nineteen Kings, 561 Years. The
Eleventh of these Kings named Ino,
         Peter's 〈◊〉 did order, That
each subject that was worth ten Pence, should yearly
give one Penny to the Pope of Rome, which Tax was
first called the King's Alms, and afterwards Peter's
Pence. The fourth Kingdom was that of Essex,
which began in the Year 527, and lasted, under fourteen
Kings, till the Year 808, when it was also conquered
by the West saxons. The fifth was that of
Northumberland, which began in the Year 547, and
lasted, under three and twenty Kings, till the Year 926,
when it also was brought under subjection by the West
saxons. The sixth Kingdom was that of the Mercians,
which had its beginning in the Year 522, and
lasted, under twenty Kings, till the Year 724, when
it also fell into the Hands of the West saxons. The seventh
was that of the East Angles, which began in
the Year 575, and lasted, under fifteen Kings, till the
Year 928, when under its King Athelstan it was united
with the rest. But after Egbert, King of the
West saxons, had either subdued the rest, or forced

their Kings to acknowledge him for their supream
Head,The Kingdom of England, 818, he and his successours were henceforward called
no more Kings of the saxons, but of England. Under
his Reign the Danes first entered England,
         Dancs first come into England. 
          as they
continued to do under the following Kings, tho' in
the beginning they were at several times bravely repulsed:
Nevertheless they got footing, at last, in the
Northern parts of England, where they lived for a
while pretty quietly under the Protection of the Kings
of England. But in the time of King Ethelred, who
began his Reign in the Year 979, the Danes made
Inrodes into the southern parts of England, forced
the English to pay them great summs of Money, ravished
their Women, and committed such outrages,
that they got the Name of Lord Danes. And tho'
the English conspired against the Danes,
         1002. and cut them
all off, yet the Danish King returned the next Year,
and made prodigious havock among the English, their
great Preparations which were made against the
Danes, being by the Craft of the Traitor Edrick (notwithstanding
Ethelred had made him Duke of Mercia,
giving him his Daughter for a Wife) rendered ineflectual;
so that Ethelred was obliged to leave his
desolate Kingdom, and to retire into Normandy. sueno,
while he was busie in plundering the Nunnery of
st. Edmund, having been killed by a sword which
no body knew from whence it came, Ethelred returned
out of Normandy into England, and forced Canute,
sueno's son,The Danes driven out, but return again. to retire out of England into Denmark;
but he returned quickly with a much greater
Force, and Ethelred making all imaginable Preparations
against him, died in the Year 1016, whose son
Edmund, sirnamed Ironside, did defend himself with
great Bravery against the Danes, and might have obtained
several Victories over them, if he had not been
therein prevented by that Traitor Edrick. At last it
was agreed, That both Kings should make an end of
the War by a single Combat, in which, tho' Edmund
had the advantage of giving Canute a dangerous
stroke, yet was he persuaded to finish the Combat, by
dividing the Kingdom with the Danes;
         King, Edmund treacherously murthered. and was afterwards,
as he retired privately to ease Nature, treacherously
murthered by Edrick. 
        
§. 4. Canute, the Dane, King of England. After the death of Edmund, Canute called
together the English Lords, and asked them, Whether
at the time, when the Kingdom was divided,
there was any thing mentioned concerning the right
of succession of the Brothers and sons of Edmund;
and the English, out of fear, answering there was not,
he received Homage from them, and was crowned
King of England. 
         1017. After he had rid himself of all that
were left of the Royal Race, he, to curry favour with
the People, married Emma, the Widow of King Ethelred,
sent most of his Danes home, and reigned
with great applause. some of his Parasites, who pretended
to attribute to him something above a Humane
Power, he ridiculed, by causing a Chair to be set near
the sea-side, commanding the seas not to wet his
Feet; but the Tide rolling on the Waves as usually,
he told them, That from thence they might judge of
what extent was the Power of all worldly Kings. He
died in the Year 1035. Harald. His son Harald succeeded, by
reason of his nimbleness sirnamed Harefoot: He did
nothing worth mentioning, but that he caused his
stepmother Emma, and her sons, whom he had,
with fair words, persuaded to come over out of Normandy,
to be miserably murthered. He died in the
Year 1039, leaving no Children behind him. After
his death the great Men of the kingdom called out of
Denmark,
         Hardiknut. 
         Hardiknut his Brother, born of Emma
and Canute, who was famous for nothing but his
greedy Appetite, he being used to keep Table four
times a day. His subjects were so averse to him, that
when he happened to die at a Feast, after he had
reigned but two Years, the English made publick Rejoicings
in the streets, which they called Hocks-tide;
the Danes, after his death, growing so despicable to
the English, that the Danish Government in England
expired, after they had ravaged England for the
space of 240, tho' they possessed the Throne but 26
Years. Edward the Consessor. After the death of Hardiknut, Edward sirnamed
the Confessor, son of King Ethelred and Emma,
Brother of Hardiknut on the Mother's-side, who
had sought sanctuary in Normandy, was called in,
to be king of England: He was crowned in the

Year 1042; and to gain the Affection of the People,
he remitted a Tax called Danegeld, which had been
constantly paid for forty Years last past. He reigned
very peaceably, except, that he was now and then
pestered with the Irish and Danish Pirates, whom, nevertheless,
he quickly overcame. He was the first to
whom was attributed that Virtue, which even to this
day the Kings of England are said to have, to heal by
touching, that Disease which in England is called the
King's Evil. 
         1066. He died without Children. He intended
to have left the Kingdom to his Cousin Edgar Atheling,
Grandson of King Edmund Ironside; but he
being very young, Harald, son of Goodwin Earl of
Kent, who had the Tuition of Edgar, put the Crown
upon his own Head, but did not enjoy it above nine
Months, being slain in a Battel by William Duke of
Normandy, whereby the Crown of England was transferred
to the Norman Family. §. 5. This William,
         W•lliam the Conquerour. sirnamed the Conquerour, was
son of Robert Duke of Normandy, who was descended
from Rollo, a Dane, who about the Year 900, with
a great number of his Country-men and Norwegians,
fell into France, and ravaging the Country without
resistance, Charles the simple, the then King of France,
thought it the best way to set him at quiet, by putting
him into possession of the Province of Neustria,
which afterwards was called Normandy, and giving
to him in Marriage his Daughter Geisa, under condition
that he should become a Christian. Rollo had a
son whose Name was William, sirnamed Long-sword;
whose son was Richard, sirnamed the Hardy; who
was the Father of Richard II. sirnamed the Good, who
was succeeded by his son Richard III. as he was by
his son Richard IV. But he dying without Issue, after
him Robert became Duke of Normandy. This
Robert was Father to William the Conquerour, whom
he had by one Arlotte, a Furrier's Daughter, with
whom, 'tis said, he fell in love, seeing her dance among
other Maids in the Country, and afterwards
married her. And notwithstanding this William was
a Bastard, yet his Father made him his successour,

and got the Nobility to acknowledge him as such
when he was but nine Years of Age, and died soon
after. This William met with great Troubles and
Dangers in his younger Years, which he had the good
fortune to overcome by his Valour, and acquired
thereby great Reputation. Willam conquers England. After the death of Edward
the Confessour, William understanding that Harald
had made himself King, resolved to demand the
Crown of England, as belonging to him by virtue of
the last Will of King Edward, who, he pretended,
had left the same to him, as an acknowledgment for
the great Favours he had received from his Father Robert. 
There are others, who say, That Edward did
only promise this by word of mouth; and that Harald
being then in Normandy, was forced to engage by
Oath, to help him in obtaining the Crown of England. 
It is possible, this was only made use of as a
pretence. But however it be, William landed without
resistance with a great Army, composed of Normans,
French and Netherlanders, whilst the Fleet of
Harald was sailed to the Northern Coast of England, to
oppose his Brother and Harald Harfager King of Norway,
who were entered England on that side, and both
vanquished by him; but thereby he left open the
Door to William to enter into the Kingdom, and
brought his souldiers back much weakened and fatigued
by their great Marches: Yet having reinforced
his Army as well as he could, he offered Battel to William
near Hastings in sussex;
         October 14, which Battel was fought
on both sides with great obstinacy;1066. till Harald being
mortally wounded by an Arrow, the Victory and
Crown of England remained to William; England,
without any further resistance, acknowledging him
for a King. The English were at first extreamly well
satisfied with his Government, he leaving each in possession
of what was his own, and only giving the vacant
Lands to his Normans; partly, also, because he was related
to the former Kings of England, partly, because
he was greatly recommended to them by the Pope. 
He was also very strenuous in securing himself, commanding
all the Arms to be taken from the People,
and to prevent Nocturnal Assemblies and Commotions,

he ordered,The Corfew Bell. That after the Bell had rung at eight
in the Evening, no Fire nor Candle should be seen in
their Houses: Besides this, he built several Forts in
the most commodious places. Notwithstanding all
this,Edgar Atheling makes an attempt. 
          
         Edgar Atheling being with some of the Nobility
retired into scotland, and being assisted by the Danish
Pirates, continually ravaged the Northern Parts of
England, burning the City of York it self, wherein all
the Normans were put to the sword; but he forced
them afterwards thence. There was also a dangerous
Conspiracy set on foot against him, which was happily
suppressed by him, before the Conspirators could join
their Forces. His son Robert Rebels. His son Robert also, endeavoured to
take from him Normandy, against whom his Father
led a great Army out of England, and the Father and
son encountring one another in the Battel, the first
was dismounted by the latter, but he discovering him
to be his Father by his voice, immediately dismounted,
embraced him, and begged his pardon, and was
reconciled to his Father, who freely pardoned all past
Injuries. This King also forced Wales to pay him Tribute,
and King Malcolm of scotland to swear Fealty
to him. But perceiving that this new-conquered
People would not be governed altogether by Mildness,
he began to act more severely,He acts as a Conquerour. taking away out of the
Convents what Gold and silver he could meet with,
of which there was great store conveied thither, as into
sanctuaries. He also imposed heavy Taxes, he appropriated
to himself a great part of the Lands of
England, which he gave unto others, reserving to
himself out of them a yearly Revenue. He took upon
him the Administration of the Goods and Possessions
of all Minors, till they came to the 21st Year of Age,
allowing them only so much as was requisite for their
Maintenance: He revised all their Privileges, introduced
new Laws in the Norman Tongue; whereby a
great many, that did not understand that Language,
fell under severe Penalties: He erected new Courts of
Judicature, and employed great tracts of Ground for
the conveniency of his Hunting. This King introduced
first the use of the long Bow in England, whereby
he had chiefly obtained the Victory against Harald,
         
and whereby afterwards the English did great mischief
to the French, and gained many Battels from them. 
At last, Philip I. King of France, by stirring up his
son Robert against him,Robert Rebels again. endeavouring to raise Disturbances
in Normandy, he went in person over into
Normandy, where the son was quickly reconciled to
the Father. But being obliged to keep his Bed at
Roan, by reason of an Indisposition in his Belly, which
was very gross, the King of France ridiculed him, asking,
How long he intended to lie in; to whom William
sent this Answer, That as soon as he could go to Church
after his lying in, he had vowed to sacrifice a thousand
Candles in France; and he was as good as his word,
for he was no sooner recovered, but he invaded France,
and burnt all where-ever he came: But he having
overheated himself he fell ill and died,1088. leaving by his
last Will, to his eldest son Normandy, but to the second,
called William, the Crown of England. 
        §. 6. William II. sirnamed Rufus, met,William Rufus. at first,
with some Disturbances, occasioned by his Brother
Robert, who pretending to the Crown, was backed by
a great many of the Nobility: but he appeased him,
by promising to pay him yearly, the summ of 3000
Marks, and that he should succeed him after his death. 
But the Nobles, who had dispersed themselves up and
down in the Country, he partly by fair means, partly
by force, reduced to Obedience. This Rebellion
proved very beneficial to the English, the Rebels being
most of them Normans, wherefore the King afterwards
relied more upon the English, as the most
faithfull. He waged War twice with Malcolm King
of scotland, whom he forced in the first to swear him
Fealty, but in the last, he killed both him and his
eldest son. He also subdued the Province of Wales. 
Among other Inventions to get Money one was remarkable;
for he summoned together 20000 Men,
under pretence to go with them into Normandy, but
when they were just agoing to be shipped off, he caused
Proclamation to be made, that every one who was
willing to pay ten shillings, should have leave to stay
at home, unto which every one of them readily consented. 

He was killed by a random shot in hunting. 1100. 
Him succeeded his younger Brother Henry,
         Henry I. who being
present when the King died, seized upon his Treasures,
whereby he procured himself a great many
Friends, so that he was preferred before Robert his
elder Brother, who at that time assisted in the taking
of Jerusalem, which proved no less than the loss of a
Crown to him. For Henry, the better to establish
himself in the Throne, remitted not only several
Taxes, which were laid upon the People by the former
Kings, but also secured unto his Interest the King
of scotland, Edgar, his most dangerous Neighbour,
by marrying his sister Maud. 'Tis reported, that
this Maud had vowed Castity, and that when her Brother
forced her to marry, she wished, that such Children,
as should be born out of this Marriage, might
never prove fortunate; which wish was afterwards
sufficiently fulfilled in her Children, and a great many
of their Posterity. Robert makes a Lesient in England. 
          Notwithstanding this, Robert
landed a great Army in England, but Henry and Robert,
by the mediation of some Friends, and a Promise
of a yearly Pension to be paid to Robert from
Henry, were reconciled, which Pension also afterwards
Robert remitted to Henry. But afterwards repenting
of what he had done, Henry was so exasperated against
him, that he made a Descent in Normandy
with a great Army, and vanquished him in a bloody
Battel, wherein he took him Prisoner. He kept him
not only a Prisoner all his life time,Normandy annexed to the Crown of England. 
          but also, at last,
put his Eyes out, uniting Normandy to the Crown of
England. But King Lewis of France, sirnamed Crassus,
being very jealous of the Greatness of Henry, undertook,
with the assistance of Fulco Earl of Anjou,
and Baldwin Earl of Flanders, to restore unto William,
son of Robert, the Dukedom of Normandy;
whereupon a bloody War ensued, which was at last
composed under this condition, That William, son of
Henry, should swear Fealty to France, for this Dukedom
of Normandy. And it obtained afterwards as a
Custom, That the King's eldest son, was called Duke
of Normandy, as long as this Province was united to
England. The new Duke of Normandy did also marry

the Daughter of the Earl of Anjou: And William,
son of Robert, being then made Earl of Flanders, and
endeavouring a second time to regain Normandy, was
slain in that War. It is related by some, tho' others
contradict it, That this King was the first who admitted
the Commons unto the Grand Council of the
Kingdom, unto which the Nobility and Bishops only
were admitted before it came to be divided into the
Higher and Lower House. His son William, being
by the carelessness of a drunken Master of a ship
drowned at sea, with a great many other persons of
Quality of both sexes, as they were coming back from
Normandy to England, he endeavoured to settle the
Crown upon his Daughter Maud, and her Heirs, she
being at first married to the Emperour, Henry IV. by
whom she had no Children, and afterwards to Geoffrey
Plantagenet, son to Fulk Earl of Anjou. Her Father
made the states of England take Oaths of Fealty to
her in his life time. The Norman Race extinct. He died in the Year 1135, and
with him ended the Male Race of the Norman Royal
Family in England. 
        §. 7. stephen. After the death of Henry, stephen Earl of
Boulogne, Henry's sister's son, did by great Promises
obtain the Crown of England, notwithstanding that
both he and the states had taken the Oaths to acknowledge
Maud for their sovereign, which they endeavoured
by a great many frivolous pretences to
prove to be of no force. The better to establish himself
in the Throne, he gained the Affection of the
states with Presents, and discharged the People of several
Taxes, giving Authority to the Nobility to build fortified
Castles, which afterwards proved very mischievous
to him. He also married his son Eustace to
Constantia, the Daughter of Ludovicus Crassus, King
of France. This King's Reign was overwhelmed with
continual Troubles. For the scots, at first, and afterwards
a great many of his Nobles, trusting in their
strong Castles, raised great Disturbances; yet he
bridled the Insolence of the scots, giving them a signal
overthrow. Maud makes War on him. But his greatest Contest was with the
Empress Maud; for she landing in England was received

by a great many, and King stephen in a Battel
fought near Chester, was taken Prisoner. But she refusing
to restore to the Londoners, King Edward''s
Laws, they sided with her Enemies, and besieged her
very closely in the City of Oxford, from whence she
narrowly escaped; and King stephen also got an opportunity
to get out of Prison. These Troubles continued
till Henry, son of Maud, came to the nineteenth
Year of his age, who, being Lord of four large
Dominions, as having inherited Anjou by his Father's,
Normandy by his Mother's side, Guienne and Poictou by
his Wife Eleonora, Daughter and Heiress of William,
the last Duke of Guienne, he also endeavoured to obtain
the Crown of England; for which purpose he
landed with an Army in England. But he obtained
his End without any great opposition; for Eustace,
King stephen's son dying suddenly, an Agreement
was made betwixt them, whereby stephen adopted
him, and constituted him his Heir and successour,
and died not long after in the Year 1124. Henry
II. Henty II. therefore succeeded him, who, among other
memorable Actions, demolished such fortified Castles
of the Nobility and Bishops, as were built with the
consent of King stephen. After he had reigned near
eighteen Years in Peace and Quietness, he had a mind
to have his son Henry crowned, the better to secure
the succession, he received him as his Copartner in the
Government; but he being married to Margaret, the
Daughter of Lewis the younger King of France, this
proved the cause of great Disturbances afterwards. 
For some persuaded young Henry, That his Father
having abdicated himself from the Government, had
committed thereby the same to his management. 
France envied that a King of England should have
such vast Possessions in France. The scots wished for
nothing more, than to have an opportunity of committing
Depredations in England. Wherefore the
French and scots,
         H•s son, with the French and scots, join in a War against him. joining with young Henry, fell upon
Henry II. all at one time, but were as vigorously
repulsed by him; the scots, especially, suffered the
most in this War, and lost all Huntingtonshire. A
Peace was also concluded with France; Adela, Daughter

of Lewis King of France, being promised in marriage
to Richard, second son of Henry. But the old
King, as 'tis reported, falling in love with her, privately
kept her company, and therefore opposed the
consummation of the marriage betwixt her and his
son Richard. This so exasperated Richard, who, after
the death of his eldest Brother Henry, was now
the next Heir to the Crown, that he made Head against
his Father; and Philip Augustus, King of France,
taking hold of this opportunity, took the City of
Muns. King Henry seeing himself, besides this, deserted
by his Friends,1189. Wife, and Children, died in
few days of Grief. Ireland conquered. 
          This Henry also conquered Ireland,
and united it to England, which he and his successours
governed under the Title of Lords of Ireland, till the
time of Henry VIII. who, after he had withdrawn
himself from the Obedience of the Pope, to nettle
him the more, assumed the Title of King of Ireland;
because the Pope pretends to the sole right to bestow
the Title of King in Christendom, and that none
ought to take it upon him without his consent;
wherefore the Pope, afterwards, to make his Pretence
the more plausible, freely gave the same Title to Mary
Queen of England. Henry also had some differences
with Thomas Backet, Archbishop of Canterbury, who
pretended it was derogatory to the Glory of God,
that the Priests, according to the King's Commands,
should be subject to the Civil Judicatures. There is a
fabulous Relation concerning this Archbishop Thomas,
That he riding a Horse-back, one time, through a
Village, the Country Fellows cut off the Tail of his
Horse, and that their Children, afterwards, were born
with such Tails. §. 8. Richard I. 
         Richard I. who succeeded his Father Henry
in the Kingdom, did, out of a preposterous Zeal, undertake
an Expedition into the Holy Land,
         He makes an Expedition into the Holy Land. 
          with 35000
Men, being accompained by Philip Augustus, King of
France. In this War he took the Island of Cyprus,
which he gave to Guido Lusignanus, who in consideration
thereof resigned his Right to Jerusalem; and
in the Year 1192, he was present at the taking of Ptolemais,
         
where the standard of Duke Leopold of Austria
being set up first, he pulled it down again, putting
his own in the place. But when they were in
great hopes of gaining Jerusalem, Philip returned home
engaging himself by a solemn Oath, that he would
not injure Richard in any of his Dominions. Hugo,
Duke of Burgundy, afterwards followed his example,
which greatly encouraged saladin: And Richard understanding
that the French were fallen into Normandy,
he also made a Peace with saladin; and taking his
way by Land incognito,
         In his return •e is taken Prisoner. was discovered in his Journey
through Austria, where Duke Leopold, remembring
the affront done to him near Ptolemais, took him Prisoner,
and delivered him to the Emperour, who after
fifteen Months Imprisonment, made him pay 100000
Pounds for his Ransom. After his return home, he
found every thing in confusion, the French having
not only ravaged Normandy, and other Provinces belonging
to him, but also his Brother had made a Pretension
to the Crown; but he obliged the latter to
implore his Pardon, and beat the French back into their
own Country. 1199. He died not long after, of a wound
which he received in a siege of some inconsiderable
place in France. 
         John. After his death his Brother John took
upon him the Crown of England,
         His Nephew Arthur opposes him. who was opposed
by Arthur Earl of the lesser Britainy, his elder Brother's
son; who finding himself alone not strong enough,
sought for Aid of the King of France, who
was ready upon all occasions to create Troubles in
England. He took a great many Cities in Normandy
and Anjou. Wherefore King John was obliged to
make a dishonourable Peace with him, giving in marriage,
to Lewis, King Philip's son, Blanch Daughter
of Alfonsus, King of Castile, and of his sister Eleonora,
to whom he gave as a Dowry, all the Cities
which Philip had taken from him, except Angiers. 
Then he married Isabella, Daughter and Heiress of the
Earl of Angoulesme, who was promised before to Hugh
Earl of Marche. He, to revenge this affront, joined
his Forces with the King of France and Prince Arthur
of Britainy, and fell into Touraine and Anjou. But
King John falling upon them unawares, routed the

Enemy, and took Prince Arthur Prisoner, who died
not long after a Prisoner in Roan. But Constantia, the
Mother of Arthur, made her Complaints to Philip
King of France, whose Vassal King John was, on the
score of such Provinces as he was possessed of in France,
and the King of France summoned King John to appear
before him, and to answer for the death of Arthur. 
But he not appearing,The King of France dispossesses him of Normandy. 
          it was declared, that
King John had forfeited what Fiefs he was possessed of
in France, and King Philip took from him Normandy
316 Years after Rollo the Norman had conquered
the same. But the French afterwards attacked also
Angiers, where they were repulsed with great loss by
King John, whereupon a Truce was concluded betwixt
them for two Years: During which time he routed
the scots, and suppressed the Rebels in Ireland and
Wales. The Truce being expired, the War began afresh
with France, and King John's Army being routed,
he made another Truce with France. But this ill
success had much diminished his Authority among his
Nobles, who also hated him, because he had imposed
heavy Taxes upon them; wherefore they, with joint
consent, demanded from him the restitution of their
ancient Privileges; but perceiving that he only intended
to give them fair Words for Deeds,The Dauphin invited by the Barons, invades England. 
          they called to
their aid, Lewis, son of Philip King of France, who
landing with a great Army in England, was received
with a general applause, and whilst King John endeavoured
to make Head against him,1216. he died overwhelmed
with Troubles. §. 9. Henry III. Him succeeded his son Henry III. whose tender
Age wrought Compassion on most, and extinguished
the Hatred which had been conceived against
his Father. And the Earl of Pembroke, to whose
Tuition he was committed, having totally routed the
French near Lincoln, and destroyed the French Forces
at sea,The Dauphin is forced •ome again. that were sent to their assistance, Lewis did renounce
all his Pretensions upon the Crown of England,
and retired into France. This King's Reign was very
long, but also very troublesom, occasioned chiefly by
the great concourse of Foreigners into England; who

crept into all places of profit: For the Pope sent at
one time 300 Italians, who being admitted into Church
Benefices, did so lay about them, that their yearly
Rents amounted to 60000 Marks of silver, which was
a greater Revenue than the Crown had at that time. 
And by reason of the Prodigality of the King, tho'
constantly burthening the People with Taxes, he was
always in great want of Money. He married, besides
this, the Daughter of the Earl of Provence, who having
abundance of poor Kindred, they enriched themselves
out of the Treasury of the King. This caused,
at last,A War with the Barons. an open War betwixt the King and the principal
Men of the Kingdom, in which Henry resigned
to the King of France,
         He quits his Pretensions on Normandy for a summ of Money. all his Pretensions upon Normandy,
Anjou, Poictou, Touraine and Mans, in consideration
of the summ of 300000 pounds paid him
by the French King, and he was himself taken Prisoner
in the first Battel: But his son, Prince Edward,
gathered another Army, and killed the General of
the Rebels, simon of Monfort Earl of Leicester; delivering
thereby his Father, and suppressing the whole
Rebellion. He did nothing worth mentioning abroad,
except that he undertook two Expeditions into France,
both which proved fruitless. He died in the Year 1272. 
Him succeed his son Edward,
         Edward I. who was at that time
in the Holy Land; and tho' he did not come into England
till a Year after his Father's death, yet took
quiet possession of the Crown. This King entirely
united the Principality of Wales to the Crown of England,
the last Prince, Lyonel, being slain in a Battel. 
Under his Reign also began a bloody War, and an
implacable hatred was raised betwixt the English and
scotch Nations, which for 300 Years after caused abundance
of bloodshed betwixt both Nations. The
occasion was thus:The causes of the Differences betwixt the English and scots. 
          After the death of Alexander III. 
King of scotland, who died without Heirs, there
were several that pretended to the Crown of scotland,
wherefore King Edward took upon him the Arbitration
of this matter, that Crown having depended on
his Predecessours, and the scots being still obliged to
do Homage to the King of England. The matter being
examined, it so proved, that John Baliol Earl of

         Galloway, and Robert Bruce, were found to have the
best Title to that Crown. But these two having contested
for the same during the space of six whole
Years, Edward sent under hand to Bruce, telling
him, That he would decide the difference concerning
the Crown of scotland in favour of him, if he would
swear Fealty to England, which Bruce refused, answering,
That he was not so fond of the Crown, as
to purchase the same with the prejudice of the Liberty
of his Native Country. But John Baliol receiving the
same offer, was made King of scotland. There was
about that time a capital Quarrel in scotland, betwixt
the Earl of Fife and the Family of Alberneth, who
had killed the Earl's Brother, and the King of scotland
had by his sentence absolved the latter. The
Earl, therefore, appealed to the English Court, whither
King Baliol was called to appear, and to sit with
the King in Parliament: But as soon as this matter
came under debate, he was admonished to rise from
his seat, and to give an account concerning his sentence. 
He pretended to answer by his Advocate,
which being denied him, he was obliged to answer in
person from the same place, where others used to plead
their Causes: Which both he and the scots resented as
so signal an affront, that, no sooner was he returned
home, but he renounced his Oath to King Edward,
pretending the same to have been unjust, and that it
was not in his power to make such a promise; and
renewing the ancient Aliance with France, he denounced
War against England. 
         A War with scotland. 
          King Edward, therefore
entered scotland with an Army, took the best
strong Holds, and forced the scots and their King to
swear fealty to him; their King he sent a Prisoner into
England, leaving considerable Forces in scotland,
which were, nevertheless, soon after beaten out of
scotland by the scots, under the Conduct of a Gentleman
of a mean Fortune, whose name was William
Wallis. But King Edward soon returned, killed 40000
scots in a Battel near Torkirke, and forced them to
swear Fealty to him a third time. Notwithstanding
all these Oaths, Robert Bruce, who had been John
Baliol's Competitour, took upon him the Crown,

who was several times worsted, but also beat the English
at other times, particularly when King Edward going
with an Army against Robert, in person, fell sick and
died. 1307. This King Edward had also had some Differences
before with France. For some of his subjects in Aquitain,
having done considerable mischief by Privateering
on the Coast of Normandy, King Philip sirnamed
the Handsome summoned Edward to appear at his
Court as his Vassal, and to answer the same, which
Edward refusing to do, he declared all his Possessions
which he held from the Crown of France to be forfeited;
taking from him by force of Arms Bourdeaux
and some other places;With France. against whom Edward entered
into a Confederacy with the Earl of Flanders and the
Emperour Adolphus. But coming into Flanders with
an Army, and finding every thing in confusion and
disorder, he made a Truce with King Philip, promising,
That his son Edward should marry Isabella, Philip's
Daughter. 1297. This King caused, likewise, all the Jews
to be banished out of England,
         He banishes the Jews. 
          not allowing them to
carry away any thing more than what they could carry
themselves. §. 10. Edward II. Him succeeded his son Edward II. who at
the very beginning of his Reign, married Isabella,
Daughter of Philip sirnamed the Handsom, with whom
he had for a Dowry Guienne, and the County of Ponthieu,
the greatest part whereof had been taken from
his Father by the French. 
         Ʋnsuccessfull 〈◊〉 his War with scotland. 
          This King was very unfortunate
in his Wars against the scots, who in the Battel
fought near Bannoksborough, with an Army of 30000
Men defeated 100000 English, which struck such a
terrour among them, that 100 English durst scarce
face three scotchmen: And the English were continually
beaten by the scots (except in Ireland, where
they beat the scots out, who had entered that Kingdom)
so that Edward was at last obliged to make a
Truce with them. 〈…〉 He met also with great Disturbances
at home, the great Men of the Kingdom pressing
him without intermission, to leave to their Mercy,
his Favourites Gaveston, and after him the spencers,
which he refusing to consent to, they fell into open Rebellion,

in which they proving unsuccessfull, several of
the Nobility paid with their lives for it. But the
Queen, pretending that the spencers had diverted the
King's Love from her, retired first into France, and
from thence into Hainault, and returning with an Army,
took the King Prisoner, and caused the spencers
to be executed. The King was carried from place to
place, and greatly abused during his Imprisonment,
having been forced before by the Parliament, to resign
the Kingdom to his son Edward. At last, about six
Months after his Deposition,1327. he was miserably murthered. §. 11. Edward III. 
         Edward III. was very young when the
Crown was conferred upon him, wherefore the Administration
of the Government was, during his Minority
committed to his Mother, and managed under her
chiefly by her Favourite Roger Mortimer. she immediately,
at the beginning, made a dishonourable
Peace with scotland, whereby Edward renounced the
sovereignty and all other Pretensions upon that Kingdom;
and the scots renounced their Title to Cumberland
and Northumberland. This and some other
matters laid to their charge, was the reason why, some
Years after, the Queen was condemned to a perpetual
Imprisonment, and Mortimer was hanged. Afterwards
a most cruel War broke out betwixt England
and France; for Lewis, Philip and Charles, all three
sons of Philip sirnamed the Handsom, dying without
Issue,His Pretensions to the French Crown. 
         Edward did pretend a right to the French
Crown, as being the late King's sister's son; alledging,
That if his Mother, as being a Woman, might
be thought incapable of governing the Realm, the
same ought not to be prejudicial to him, as being a
Man. But Philip de Valois, notwithstanding he was
a degree farther of, as being the late King's Father's
Brother's son, yet prevailed with the states, who under
pretence of the salick Law, and the hatred they
bore to a Foreign sovereign; being, besides this, encouraged
thereunto by the Earl of Artois, set him
upon the Throne. Edward being afterwards summoned
by Philip, to come in person, and to do Homage

for the Dukedom of Aquitain, went thither
in person, he being then but young, and England
full of intestine Commotions, notwithstanding this
seemed to be very prejudicial to his Pretensions: And
King Edward appearing in the Church at Amiens with
the Crown upon his Head, his sword and spurs on, was
ordered to lay them aside, and to take the Oath upon
his Knees; which so exasperated Edward, that
France afterwards felt the effects of it. Not long after,
Edward Baliol, son of John Baliol, made pretensions
to the Crown of scotland against the young
King, being assisted by King Edward, notwithstanding
King David of scotland had married his sister. 
During which Commotions the English recovered Barwick
upon Tweed,
         He is successfull against scotland. 
          and in one Battel killed 30000
scots, whereupon Edward Baliol did do Homage to
the King of England for the Crown of scotland. By
this time King Edward being come to his riper years,His Expedition into France. 
         
upon the instigation of Robert Earl of Artois, undertook
an Expedition into France, and taking upon
him the Title and Arms of France, renewed his Pretensions
to that Crown. In this Expedition he entirely
routed the French Fleet near sluys, which was
sent to hinder his landing,1340. and defeated 30000 Men. 
and after he had besieged Tournay he made a Truce
with them for twelve Months. In the mean while
the English were engaged in a War with the scots,
who, under the Conduct of their former King David,
had driven out Edward Baliol. The time of the Truce
being expired, the War began afresh in France, where,
among other places, the English took Angoulesme. 
King Edward himself came with a great Army into
Normandy, and took, both there and in Picardy, a
great many places from the French: At last a bloody
Battel was fought betwixt them near Crecy in Picardy,
         The Battel near Crecy. 
         
wherein the English, tho' but 30000 strong, fought
against 60000 French, killing 30000 upon the spot,
among whom were 1500 persons of Quality. The
next day after 7000 French were cut to pieces by the
English, who, not knowing what had happened the
day before, were upon their march to the French
Camp. 1346. In this Battel no Quarter was given on either

side. Much about the same time King David of scotland
entered England with an Army of 60000 Men, to
make a Diversion in behalf of France;
         The scotch defeated. but he was defeated
in a great Battel, and himself taken Prisoner. 
The English had no less success the same Year in Britainy
and Guienne. In the Year next following King
Edward took the City of Calais,
         He takes Calais. 
          which he filled with
English Inhabitants. Prince Edward, son to Edward
III. 1356. whom his Father had sent with an Army
into Guienne, behaved himself very valiantly, making
great havock where-ever he came. John King of
France drew out an Army against him of 60000 Men,
tho' the Prince was not above 8000 strong; upon
this the King, thinking he had catched the Bird in the
Net, would not accept of any Conditions, tho' never
so advantageous. But Prince Edward having posted
his Men betwixt the Bushes and Vineyards, from
thence so galled the French Horse with his long Bows,
that they being repulsed, put all the rest in confusion;
King John himself was taken Prisoner, as also his
youngest son, and above 1700 persons of Quality
were slain. The Battel near Poictiers. 
          This Battel was fought about two Leagues
from Poictiers. At last, after King Edward had with
three Armies over-run the greatest part of France, a
Peace was concluded by the Mediation of the Pope, at
Bretaigny,
         A dishonourable Peace to France. 
          not far from Chartres: The Conditions of
this Peace were, That England, besides what it had
before in France, should be put in possession of Poictou,
Zaintogne, Rochelle, Pais d' Aulnis, Angoumois, Perigord,
Limoisin, Quercy, Agenois, and Bigorre, with
an absolute sovereignty over the same; besides this,
the City of Calais, the Counties of Oye, Guisnes, and
Ponthieu, and three Millions of Crowns were to be
given as a Ransom for the King; and that King John
should give his three younger sons, his Brother, and
thirty other persons of Quality as Hostages for the
payment of the said summs. But that on the other
side, the English should restore all the other places
which they had taken from the French, and renounce
their Right and Title to the Crown of France. The
Peace being thus concluded, Prince Edward, to
whom his Father had given the Dukedom of Aquitain,
         
restored Peter King of Castile to his Kingdom. But
in his Journey, the souldiers being very mutinous for
want of Pay, he levyed an extraordinary Tax upon
his subjects, which they complaining of to the King
of France, he summoned the Prince to appear before
him, who answered, He would suddenly appear with
an Army of 60000 Men; therefore Charles V. King
of France,
         Another War with France. 
          denounced War against the English, pretending,
that the promised sovereignty, at the last
Peace, was void, because the Prince had not fulfilled
the Articles of the same, and had committed Hostilities
against France. But whilst Prince Edward was
busie in making great Preparations against France, he
died suddenly, and with him, the English good Fortune;
for the French took from them all the Dukedom
of Aquitain, except Bourdeaux and Bayonne. 
The King was so troubled at the loss both of so brave
a son and his Conquests in France, that he died within
ten Months after his son. 1377. 
        §. 12. Richard II. Him succeeded Richard II. son of that
brave Prince Edward, who being but eleven Years of
Age when he came to the Crown, was despised by the
French, who burnt several places on the English Coast. 
The scots also made an Inrode on the other side of
England, and the War being carried on with various
Fortune,A Peace with France. 
          after several Truces expired, a Peace was at
last concluded. There were also great commotions
in the Kingdom under this King's Reign:Troubles at home. For in
Kent, and other neighbouring Counties, there was an
Insurrection of the Rabble, occasioned by the Insolence
of one of the Receivers of the Poll Tax: This
Rabbles Intention was to have murthered both the
Nobility and Clergy, except the Mendicant Fryars;
but were soon restrained by the King's Valour. But
there were continual Discontents betwixt the King
and the Lords, the King being resolved to rule according
to his Pleasure, and to maintain his Favourites
against the Lords, who were for removing his
Favourites, and bringing his Royal Power into a more
narrow compass by the Authority of the Parliament. 
But it was the King's custom, as soon as the Parliament

was dissolved, to reverse all that was concluded
upon before; yet once the Parliament got him at an
advantage, when it forced him to permit most of
his Favourites to be either killed or banished; and
obliged him by an Oath to promise, That he would
administer the Government according to the Advice
of his Lords. Not long after, a Conspiracy among
the Lords was discovered against him, a great
many of them paid for it with their Heads, the
King seemed at last to have mastered his Enemies;
but he was, nevertheless, ruined at last, which was occasioned
thus:The occasion of his Ruin. 
         Henry Duke of Lancaster accused the
Duke of Norfolk, as if he had spoken ill of the King;
and the latter giving the lye to the former, they challenged
one another, but the Duel was prevented by
the King's Authority, who banished them both out of
the Kingdom. Henry of Lancaster retired into France,
raising there a Faction against the King, by inviting all
dissatisfied persons to him, who promised to set him
on the Throne of England. 
         Henry Duke of Lancaster invades England. He landed but with a few
in England, but at a time, as King Richard's ill Fortune
would have it, when he was in Ireland; and the
Wind proving contrary, he could not have notice of
his Enemies arrival in England till six Weeks after,
which gave them opportunity and leisure to strengthen
their Party. The King also committed a great errour,
for that he afterwards, against his Promise, tarried so
long in Ireland, which was the cause, that such Forces
as were brought together by his Friends, whom
he had sent before, were again dispersed before his arrival
in England. Coming afterwards in person into
England, and being informed how powerfull his Enemies
were, he despaired of his Affairs, and having dismissed
his Forces, that were ready to fight for him till
the last gasp, he was made a Prisoner. Henry of Lancaster
calling, immediately hereupon, a Parliament,
a great many things were objected to Richard, and
he was declared to have forfeited the Crown. But
before this Resolution was published, he resigned himself,
and was not long after miserably murthered in
Prison. 1399. 
        
§. 14. Thus Henry IV. of the House of Lancaster,
         Henry IV. of the House of Lancaster. 
         
came to the Crown, he being after the Deposition
of King Richard declared King by the Parliament,
tho', if the Pretensions of Henry, together
with the Power of the Parliament, be duely examined,
the Title of Henry IV. to the Crown of England,
will be found to have a very ill Foundation. For what
some pretend, that Edmund, from whom the House
of Lancaster descended, was the eldest son of Henry III. 
and that he being very deformed, was obliged to give
way to his Brother Edward I. is rejected as a frivolous
Fable by the English Historians. This King did
labour under great difficulties at the beginning of his
Reign,He had great Difficulties which he surmounted. all which he at last overcame: For the Design
of the French to restore Richard ended with his death. 
And a Conspiracy of some Lords against him was discovered,
even before Richard died. The scots, who made
War on him, got nothing but blows. The Welshmen
also, in hopes of having met with an opportunity to
shake off the English Yoke, joined with a discontented
Party out of England, and rebelled against him; but
before they could join all their Forces, the King came
suddenly upon them, and overthrew them in a great
Battel, wherein, 'tis said, the King killed six and thirty
with his own Hands. Yet the discontented Party
did not rest, but entered into a third Conspiracy against
him, which was soon discovered. A great many
of them retired afterwards into scotland, where they
stirred up the scots against England (for these never
used to miss an opportunity of being troublesome to
England) but they got nothing but blows again for
their pains. This King died in the Year 1413. §. 15. Henry V. After him reigned his son Henry V. who
in his younger Years did not promise much, but after
he came to the Crown, shewed himself one of the
most valiant Kings the English ever had. And as he
was very Aspiring and Ambitious, so he thought he
could not meet with a better opportunity of gaining
Glory, than by entring into a War with France, and
renewing the ancient Pretensions upon that Crown. He
sent, therefore, his Ambassadours to Charles VI. to

lay claim to that Crown, and to make this Proposition
to him, That if he would resign to him the Crown
of France, he would marry his Daughter Catharine. 
But it being not usual that Princes are persuaded to
part with a Crown thus, the next way was to try their
Fortune by Arms. He invades France to prosecute his claim of the Crown. The Battel uear Aguicourt. 
          
         Henry therefore entered France with
an Army, took Harfleur, and obtained afterwards a
most signal Victory near Agincourt in Picardy against
the French, who (according to the English Historians)
were six times stronger than the English. Ten
thousand of the French were killed upon the spot, and
as many taken Prisoners, not above some Hundreds
being slain of the English: Yet at that time Henry did
not pursue his Victory. But not long after, the French
Fleet having first been beaten by the English near Harfleur,
Henry made a second Descent upon France, taking
one place after another in Normandy, and at last
the City of Roan it self: He met with very little opposition
in France at that time,1419. because all was in confusion
at the French Court, the King, Charles VI. being
not in his right Wits, and the Queen being fallen
out with her son, the Dauphin, who had taken from
her all her Jewels and Money, alledging, That they
might be better emploied upon the souldiery: Which
was the reason that the Queen siding with John Duke
of Burgundy, did promote him to the place of chief
Minister of France; who was more intent to maintain
his private Interest and Greatness, against the
Dauphin, than to make Head against the English. A
Congress was proposed to be held betwixt the two
Kings, but this Design was frustrated by the cunning
of the Dauphin, who gave the Duke hopes of an entire
Reconciliation to be made betwixt them both. 
And Monterau being named for the place where they
should meet, the Duke of Burgundy was there,
(questionless, by instigation of the Dauphin) miserably
murthered. For this reason his son, Duke Philip, being
resolved to revenge his Father's death, declared
openly for the English, and by his Mediation obtained,
That King Henry should marry the Princess Catharine,
and during the life of his Wife's Father, administer
the Government in his name, but after his death,

should succeed him in the Throne. The Nuptials
were afterwards celebrated at Troyes in Champaigne. 
         1420. 
After the Treaty had been confirmed by solemn Oaths
on both sides,The Administration of France to be in Henry during Charles's life, and after his death the Crown to descend to him. which was also ratified by the three
Estates assembled in Paris, where the Dauphin was
summoned to appear, to answer concerning the death
of the Duke of Burgundy: But he not appearing,
sentence was given against him, That he should for
ever be banished out of France. There were also
some who designed to make him away, and he was
forced to go from place to place, but his common
place of Residence was Bourges, wherefore they used
to call him, by way of ridiculing, The King of
Bourges. In the mean time the English took one
place after another from him. At last, King Henry
being upon his March to raise the siege of the City of
Cosne on the Loire, which was besieged by the Dauphin,
he fell sick in his Journey thither, and being
carried to Bois de Vicennes, there died in the flower of
his Age and Felicity,1422. leaving the Administration of
France to his Brother, the Duke of Bedford, and the
Administration of England to his second Brother, the
Duke of Gloucester. 
        §. 15. Henry VI. Him succeeded his son Henry VI. a Child of
eight Months old; who, after he was grown up, degenerated
from his Father's Martial Valour, and by
his ill management, lost what his Father had got, eclipsing
thereby the English Glory. He was, after the
death of Charles VI. who died not long after Henry
V. Proclaimed King of France. 
          proclaimed King of France in Paris. In opposition
to him, the Dauphin, Charles VII. also declared
himself King of France, with whom sided the
Bravest among the French, and a great many scots
were sent to his assistance. But Philip Duke of Burgundy,
and John Duke of Britainy, held to the Confederacy
with the English, which was renewed at that
time. And then they began to fall upon one another
with great fury: For the French received a great
Defeat near Crevant in Burgundy,
         1423. and were soundly
beaten near Verneuil. 
         1424. In the Year 1425 the French
had besieged st. Jaques de Beuveron with Forty

thousand Men, the Garrison being reduced to great
extremity, prayed with a loud voice to st. George of
salisbury: The Besiegers hearing the name of salisbury
very frequently among the Besieged, supposed
that the Earl of salisbury was coming to raise the
siege; whereat the French were so terrified that
they run away for fear of his Name. This is certain,
that the English, for a while, were Masters
where-ever they came, but before Orleans the carreer
of their Fortune was first stopt. For, tho, during that
siege, they beat the French, who came to cut off
their Provisions (which Battel is commonly called the
Battel of the Flemmings) and the City would have surrendered
it self to the Duke of Burgundy, which the
English would not accept of; yet did they not only
lose in that siege the brave Earl of salisbury, but
also the French,
         The Maid 〈◊〉 
           Orleans. 
          being encouraged by a Maid called
Joan, that was born in Lorraine, beat the English from
before Orleans. This Maid did several great exploits
against the English, and led, her self in person, King
Charles to his Coronation in Rheims. At last she was
taken Prisoner by the English in an Encounter, who
carried her to Roan, where they burnt her for a Witch. 
But because the English perceived, that after the Coronation
of Charles, a great many Cities sided with him,
they also called over their King Henry out of England,
and crowned him King of France in Paris. 
         He was crowned in Paris. 
          About
the same time, a Truce was concluded by Mediation
of the Pope,1432. for six Years; but it lasted not long, for
the French, during the time of the Truce, possessed
themselves of several places, which they had brought
over to their side by cunning Insinuations, pretending,
That any thing gained without open violence did not
violate the Truce. And King Charles's Maxim was,
Not to fight with the English,The English decline in France. 
          
         but to strive to
get Advantages over them rather by Policy than open
force. But that which gave a great blow to the English,
was, That the Duke of Burgundy having taken a
distaste at the English upon some slight occasion, was
reconciled to King Charles. There were some small
Differences arisen betwixt the Duke of Bedford and
the Duke of Burgundy; to compose which, a meeting

was appointed at st. Omer: But the time being
near at hand, a Dispute arose, which of them should
appear there first; it being supposed, that he who should
come first, did thereby yield the Precedency to the
other; wherefore the Duke of Bedford refused to come
first, alledging, That he being Regent of France,
ought not in that Quality to give preference to a Vassal
of France. But the Duke of Burgundy stood upon
his right of being sovereign of the place where they
were to meet;1435. so that the meeting being set aside, the
Duke of Burgundy broke quite off with the English,
         The Duke of Burgundy leaves the English and is reconciled to Charles. 
         
and afterwards assisted King Charles against them. 
The death of the Duke of Bedford, proved another
Misfortune to the English. For the Duke of somerset
and the Duke of York both pretended to his place; and
tho' the latter did obtain it, yet did the first always
oppose his Designs, so that, before the new Regent
arrived, Paris, which had been seventeen Years in the
possession of the English, and a great many other Cities,
did surrender themselves to King Charles. 
         1436. Yet
did the Duke of Gloucester beat the Duke of Burgundy
before Calais, making great havock in Flanders,
Artois and Hainault; and the brave Talbot did considerable
mischief to the French. 
         The occasion of the Troubles in England. 
          But when afterwards,
by a Truce made with France, the fury of the War
ceased for a little time, there was a Foundation laid
in England for intestine Commotions. The King had
promised marriage to the Daughter of the Earl of Armagnac,
to prevent which, the French King had made
both the Earl and his Daughter Prisoners. The Earl of
suffolk, who was then Ambassadour in France, did propose
thereupon, without having received any Instructions
to that purpose from the King, a Match betwixt the
King and Margaret Daughter of Renè, Duke of Anjou
and King of Naples and sicily, and afterwards persuaded
the King to ratifie the same. This Match was mightily
opposed by the Duke of Gloucester, the King's
Uncle, who alledged, That her Father had only the
bare Titles of King and Duke; and that besides this,
great Injury was done thereby to the first Bride, viz. 
to the Daughter of the Count of Armagnac. Notwithstanding
this, the Match went forward, and to

obtain the Bride of the French, Anjou and Maine were
given them as a Recompence. The King being thus
led away by the Queen and his Favourites, her first
design was to revenge her self upon the Duke of
Gloucester, whom she accused of Male Administration,
and after she had got him committed to Prison,
caused him privately to be murthered. The death of
so innocent a Man did afterwards fall heavy upon the
King: For the French,
         1449. not long after, took from
them all Normandy,
         The English driven out of France. 
          the English, by reason of a Rebellion
in Ireland, not being in a capacity to send
thither speedy and sufficient Relief. They were also
beaten out of Aquitain, so that they had nothing left
them in France, but Calais, and some neighbouring
places; neither could they, afterwards, ever get footing
again in France. 
         The occasion of this sudden loss. This sudden loss was occasioned
by the carelessness of the English Garrisons, that were
not provided with able Governours, as also by the
Pride of the English, whereby they were become
hatefull to the French subjects: But the chief cause
was, Richard Duke of York, who had underhand
raised intestine Commotions in England: For he being
sensible of the King's Weakness, and how ill satisfied
the People were with the Queen's management of Affairs,
hoped, by fomenting and raising Troubles in
the Kingdom, to make way for himself to obtain the
Crown; and this he did, principally, because he pretended
to have the best right to the Crown, being descended,
by his Mother's side, from Lionel Duke of
Clarence, third son of King Edward III. whereas
Henry was descended from John of Gaunt, fourth son
of the said Edward III. but publickly he professed,
That his Intention was only to remove from the King's
Person his pernicious Favourites, and especially the
Duke of somerset. Having therefore got an Army
on foot, he fought with the King's Forces, in which
Battel the Duke of somerset was slain, and the Duke
of York thereupon declared Protector of the King's
Person and the Kingdom. But this Agreement did
not last long, and things came quickly again to an
open War, wherein the Duke of York being worsted,
was forced to fly into Ireland. But not long after

the Earl of Warwick did beat the King's Army, and
taking him Prisoner, the Duke of York was again declared
Protector of the King and Kingdom, and lawfull
Heir of the Crown; under condition that Henry
should retain the Title of King during his life. But
Matters did not remain long in this condition, for the
Queen, who was fled into scotland, marched with a
great Army against the Duke of York, who was killed
in the Battel, and all the Prisoners were executed. 
But his son, in conjunction with the Earl of Warwick,
raised another Army, and marching up to London,
the young Duke of York was there proclaimed
King by the Name of Edward IV. 1460. 
        §. 16. Edward IV. of the House of York. 
          Thus Edward IV. came to the Crown, but
could not maintain it without great difficulty: For
Henry had got together a very powerfull Army in
the North, against whom Edward fought the most
bloody Battel that was ever fought in England,
         A bloody Battel betwixt Edward and Henry. 
          there
being 36796 Men killed upon the spot, because Edward
knowing his Enemies to be superiour in number, had
ordered, not to give Quarter to any of them: After
which Battel Henry retired into scotland, from whence
he returned with another Army, and being again defeated,
with much adoe got safely into scotland. But
returning again incognito into England, he was taken
Prisoner and committed to the Tower. This Prince,
would have made a better Priest than a King of such
a Nation, that was distracted by the Animosities of
several Factions. But the Tragedy did not end here:
The King had sent the Earl of Warwick into France,
to conclude a Match betwixt him and Bona the
Daughter of Lewis Duke of savoy. But the King
having in the mean time suddenly married Elizabeth,
the Widow of John Gray, the Earl was so dissatisfied
at it, that he declared for King Henry; and having
brought over to his Party the Duke of Clarence, the
Brother of King Edward, he fell upon a sudden upon
Edward, and took him Prisoner; but by the carelessness
of his Keepers he escaped not long after. 
And tho' an Agreement was then made betwixt
them, yet was it of no long continuance, for the

Earl of Warwick's Forces were routed, and he forced
to fly into France. As soon as he had recovered himself
a little, he returned into England, where he was
so well received, that he forced King Edward to fly
into the Netherlands to Charles Duke of Burgundy:
And King Henry,
         Henry taken out of Prison and set on the Throne. after he had been nine Years a Prisoner
in the Tower, was again set upon the Throne. 
But Edward having received some Assistance from the
Duke of Burgundy,
         Edward returns into England. 
          returned again into England; but
perceiving that but few came in to him, he made an
Agreement with King Henry, which he confirmed
with a solemn Oath, That he would not undertake any
thing against him, but be contented with his own
Estate: Yet notwithstanding his Oath, he underhand
gathered what Forces he could. The Earl of Warwick
therefore marched towards him, when the Duke
of Clarence, being reconciled to his Brother King Edward,
went over with all his Forces to him. This
gave a signal blow to the Earl of Warwick, who being
now not strong enough to oppose him, was forced
to let him march up to London, where he was joyfully
received by the Londoners, to whom, as 'tis said, he
owed much Money, and was very acceptable to their
Wives;Henry a second time Prisoner 147•, and murthered by the Duke of Gloucester. 
          but King Henry was committed again to the
Tower. Then King Edward attacked the Earl of Warwick,
where a bloody Battel was fought, the Victory
seeming, at first, to incline on the Earl's side: But
some of his Troops, by reason of a thick Fogg, charged
one upon another, which lost him the Battel, he
remaining, with a great many other persons of Quality,
slain in the Field. There happened also this misfortune,
That King Henry's Lady and his son Edward
having got together very considerable Forces in France,
could not come time enough to his assistance, having
been detained by contrary Winds; and coming afterwards
into England, she was taken Prisoner, and her
son killed; and King Henry, also, was murthered by
the Hand of the bloody Duke of Gloucester. England
being thus restored to its Tranquility at home,
Charles, Duke of Burgundy, who was in hopes of getting
an advantage by a War betwixt England and
France, stirred up King Edward against Lewis XI. King of

         France. But King Lewis, who was not ignorant how
mischievous the Confederacy of England and Burgundy
might prove to him, did endeavour to detain the
English King with fair words, and to render the Duke
of Burgundy suspected to him; which had the designed
effect with Edward, who considered with himself,
That Charles Duke of Burgundy having besieged
Nuys, did not send him the promised succours; so that
the Peace was easily concluded, the French having
been very liberal to the English. To confirm this
Peace, King Lewis proposed a Congress to be held betwixt
him and Edward at a certain place, where he,
without making any further difficulty, appeared first
in person, and bestowed a good quantity of Wine upon
the English souldiers, who soon after returned with their
King, who had got but little Honour in this Expedition
into England. But he behaved himself better against
the scots, to whom he did considerable mischief. 
In the mean time the Duke of Gloucester had
rid himself of his elder Brother, the Duke of Clarence,
thereby to advance himself one step nearer to the
Crown. At last King Edward being now resolved
to enter again into a War with France (since King
Lewis made a very slight account of what he had promised
in the last Peace, after he was once rid of his
Enemy) he fell sick, and died in the Year 1483. §. 17. Edward V. After the death of Edward IV. his son Edward
V. a Child of eleven Years of Age was proclaimed
King, but scarce enjoyed this Title ten Weeks. 
For his Uncle Richard, Duke of Gloucester, the most
bloody and wicked Man that ever the World beheld,
immediately made it his business to set the Crown upon
his own Head. Wherefore he first of all secured to
himself the Tuition of the King's and his Brother's
Persons, by making away their most trusty Friends. 
Afterwards, by the help of some Impudent Priests, he
got it spread abroad, That Edward IV. was born in
Adultery, and that consequently the Crown did of right
belong to himself, as being the most like his Father. 
At last, the Duke of Buckingham did insinuate into
the Lord Mayor of London, That the Crown ought to

be offered to Richard; and his Proposal being approved
by the Acclamations of a few Villains set on
for that purpose, it was divulged, That the People
had conferred the Crown upon Richard. 
         Richard III. Having by
these Intrigues obtained the Crown, Richard III. got
himself proclaimed King;1483. and having been crowned,
he caused the innocent King Edward V. Murthers his Nephews. and his Brother,
miserably to be murthered. But soon after his
Coronation a difference arose betwixt him and the
Duke of Buckingham, who had been chiefly instrumental
in helping him to the Crown. He therefore
leaving the Court, began to make a Party against
the King, with an intention, to set the Crown upon
the Head of Henry Earl of Richmond, who was then
an Exile in Britainy. And tho' the Duke of Buckingham's
Plot was discovered, and he beheaded, yet was
not the Design stopt. For the Earl of Richmond set
fail with a great Fleet out of Britainy, but being
driven by contrary Winds on the Coast of Normandy,
he sought Aid of Charles VIII. King of France,
which he readily granted him. A great many English,
also, went over to him, who swore Allegiance
to him, he promising them upon Oath, That he
would marry the Princess Elizabeth, Daughter of Edward
IV. But Henry was within an ace of having
been delivered up to Richard by the Treachery of one
Pieter Landois, Treasurer of the Duke of Britainy,
who had received a great summ of Money from Richard
for undertaking it, for which reason he was afterwards
hanged by his Master's order. Richard also
had an Intention of marrying the Princess Elizabeth,
and therefore had privately made away his former Lady,He murther's his Wife. 
but was obliged to delay the consummation of
the Match, by reason of the approaching danger
from Henry:
         Henry Earl of Richmond invades England. 
          Who to prevent this intended Match,
did in all haste sail out of France, and landing in
Wales, was kindly received by most. Not long after
he gave Battel to Richard, where William stanley,
with some thousands of Men, went over to Henry;
and besides this, a great many of Richard's souldiers
refusing to fight, Richard himself was slain
in the Field, and the Crown being immediately

there put upon Henry's Head, he was proclaimed
King. 1485. 
        §. 18. Henry VII. Hitherto England had been miserably torn
to pieces by the bloody Wars betwixt the Houses of
York and Lancaster, the first whereof bore a White,
the latter a Red Rose in their shields. For Henry IV. 
of the House of Lancaster, had driven Richard II. 
from the Throne; Edward IV. of the House of York,
dethroned again his Grandson Henry VI. And Henry
VII. of the House of Lancaster, took from Edward
the IV th's Brother, Richard III. both his Crown
and Life. He united the White and Red Roses. This King Henry marrying the Daughter
of Edward IV. united the Red and White Roses, and
by his singular Wisdom, did again settle the state of
the Kingdom. Yet was he not altogether free from
Disturbances at home. Lambert symnel. For first of all, one Lambert
symnel, son to a Baker, taking upon him the Name
and Person of Edward Earl of Warwick, caused himself
to be proclaimed King in Ireland. This Comedy
was first invented by a Priest, and encouraged by Margaret,
the Widow of Charles Duke of Burgundy,
sister to Edward IV. who, to spite Henry, gave them
all the Assistance she could. This symnel transported
an Army out of Ireland into England, but was routed
by Henry; and being taken Prisoner, was made a
Turnspit in the King's Kitchin. In the Year 1491
Henry undertook an Expedition against France,
         He makes an Expedition in
           •• 
           France,
          and
besieged Bologne. But the Emperour Maximilian
failing in his promises of giving him Assistance, he in
consideration of a good summ of Money made a Peace
with France. In the mean time, Margaret Dutchess
Dowager of Burgundy, had set up another Impostor,
whose Name was Perkin Warbeck. 
         Perkin Warbeck. He pretended to be
Richard, a younger son of King Edward IV. and
knew so well how to act his part, that he got a considerable
Party in Ireland. From thence he went to
Paris, where he was very well received, France being
then engaged in a War with England: But a Peace
being concluded betwixt them, he retired to the
Dutchess Margaret's Court. From thence he returned
into Ireland, and afterwards came into scotland,
         
where being splendidly received by that King, he was
married to one of his Kinswomen, and entered England
with a confiderable Army. This business might
have proved very dangerous to England, since there
were, at the same time, great Tumults in England,
arisen about some new Taxes. But the Rebels were
beaten, and the scots obliged to retire with great loss
into scotland. The scots made thereupon a Peace
with England, promising, among other things, not to
uphold, by any ways, the Impostor Perkin, who fled
from thence into Ireland, and so came into Cornwall,
where he caused himself to be proclaimed King: But
perceiving that few came over to his side, and the
King's Forces coming upon him, he took sanctuary
in a Church, and surrendered himself to the King, who
committed him a Prisoner to the Tower; but he having
twice made an attempt to escape, was at last
hanged according to his demerits. In the Year 1501,
a Marriage was concluded betwixt James IV. He marries his Daughter Margaret to the King of scotland. 
          King of
scotland, and Margaret the Daughter of Henry, which
afterwards united England and scotland under one
King. Arthur, also, eldest son of Henry, married
Catharine Daughter of Ferdinand the Catholick. But
the Prince dying a few Weeks after the Wedding, in
the sixteenth Year of his Age, and Henry being unwilling
to give back the Dowry, and desirous to maintain
the new Alliance with Ferdinand, married the said
Catharine to his second son Henry, who was then but
twelve Years of Age, having obtained a Dispensation
from Pope Julius II. under pretence that there had been
no carnal knowledge betwixt them; which afterwards
proved the cause of great Alterations. This King is
reckoned among the wisest of his Age, and the only
thing which is reprehended in him, is, That he had a
way, by false Accusations against the rich, to squeeze
out of them great summs of Money from them. He
died in the Year 1509. §. 19. Henry VIII. 
         Henry VIII. immediately upon his first accession
to the Throne, celebrated the Nuptials with
his Brother's Widow, more to fulfill his Father's Will
than out of his own Inclination; yet as long as he

lived with her in Wedlock he governed the Realm very
laudably, and in the Court nothing was seen but
Plays and Diversions. As to his Transactions abroad,
upon the persuasions of Pope Julius II. He enters into League with Ferdinand and the Pope, and Ferdinand
the Catholick, he entered into a Consederacy with
them against France, which Confederacy was pretended
to be made for the defence of the Holy see. 1512. 
         Ferdinand also put him in hopes of recovering Guienne;
wherefore Henry sent an Army into Biscay,
         His Expedition against France. 
          to
fall in conjunction with the spaniards into Guienne. 
But Ferdinand having rather his Eye upon Navarre,
and being negligent in sending timely succours to the
English, they returned home without doing any
thing. A second. In the Year 1513 Henry entered France with
a great Army, where he lost his time in the taking of
Terovane and Tournay, which was wholly destroyed in
spight of all the Attempts of the French to relieve it, tho'
Tournay was redeemed by Francis I. with a good summ
of Money. But at that time Henry did not pursue
his Advantage, partly out of carelessness, incident to
young Men, partly, because he had carried on this
War, not so much for his own Interest, as in favour
of the Pope, and so returned into England. During
the absence of Henry,
         An Invasion of the scots. 
          
         James IV. King of scotland,
upon instigation of the French invaded England, but
received a great overthrow, himself being killed in the
Battel. In the Year next following, Henry perceiving
that his Father-in-law Ferdinand did only impose
upon him, concluded a Peace with France, giving
his sister Mary in marriage to King Lewis XII. In
the Year 1522 Henry again denounced War against
Francis I. He makes a second War against France. 
          and sent considerable Forces into France,
which, nevertheless, both in the same and next following
Year did nothing of moment; and the scots,
on the other side, obtained not any advantages against
the English. But after Francis was taken Prisoner
near Pavia, it seemed that Henry had met with
a fair opportunity to give a great blow to France,
more especially, since he had before prepared a Fleet,
which lay ready to make a Descent in Normandy, yet
he left Charles and made Peace with France. And

         Charles, after he thought he had obtained his aim,
did not make any great account of England, leaving
the Princess Mary, Daughter of Henry, to whom he
had promised Marriage, for the Princess of Portugal,
whom he married. And whereas he used formerly to
write to the King with his own Hand, and subscribe
himself, Your son and trusty Friend; he now caused
his Letters to be writ by his secretary, subscribing only
his Name, Charles. And truly it seemed very necessary
for Henry to keep a little the Ballance. Tho' a great
many are of opinion, That Cardinal Woolsey had a
great hand in this business, who was no great Friend
of Charles V. because he had not promoted him to
the Papal Dignity, and had denied him the Archbishoprick
of Toledo, of which he had put him in hopes
at first; neither did he subscribe himself any more Your
son and Cousin, as he used to do. But however it be,
Henry at that time saved France from an imminent
danger. The Divorce of Henry VIII. 
          After he had lived very peaceably and well
with his Queen for the space of twenty Years, he began
to have a scruple of Conscience, Whether he could
lawfully live in Wedlock with his Brother's Widow;
which scruple he pretended was raised in him first by the
President of Paris, who was sent to treat concerning a
Marriage betwixt Mary Daughter of Henry, and the
second son of Francis. some say, that he being weary
of her, was fallen in love with Anna Bullen, and
found out this way to be rid of her. Yet this seems
not so probable to some, since he did not marry the
said Anna Bullen till three Years after he pretended to
the scruple of Conscience; whereas the heat of Love
does not usually admit of such delays. some will
have it, that Cardinal Woolsey raised this scruple first
in him, on purpose to nettle Charles V. and to please
Francis I. in hopes, after this Divorce, to make up a
Match betwixt Henry and the Dutchess of Alenson, sister
of Francis. But however it be, the business was
brought before the Pope, who gave a Commission to
the Cardinal Campegius, to enquire, in conjunction
with Woolsey, into the matter: 'Tis said, That the
Pope was willing to gratify Henry, and for that purpose
had sent a Bull to Campegius, yet with this

caution, to keep it by him till further order. But
when he afterwards saw Charles V. to prove so successfull,
he durst not venture to do any thing that might
displease him, wherefore he ordered Campegius to burn
the Bull, and to delay the business to the utmost. 
The Queen also refused to answer to their Commission,
but appealed to the Pope in person; besides, Charles V. 
and his Brother Ferdinand had protested against this
Commission. Woolsey did also perceive, that the King
was fallen in love with Anna Bullen, which being
likely to prove prejudicial to his Authority, he persuaded
the Pope underhand, not to give his consent
unto this Divorce. The fall• of Woolsey. 
          
         Henry being informed what Intrigues
the Cardinal was carrying on against him,
humbled the greatness of this haughty Prelate, who
died in the Year next following in great misery. And
Henry being made sensible, that the Pope regarded
more his own Interest than the merits of the Cause,
he forbid, that any body should hence forward appeal
to Rome, or send thither any Money for Church
Benefices. He therefore sent to several Universities in
France and Italy to desire their Opinions in this matter,
who all unanimously agreed in this, That such a
Marriage was against the Laws of God; and having
once more, by his Ambassadours, sollicited the Pope,
but in vain, to decide the matter, the King had the
same adjudged in Parliament, and divorced himself
from her,1532. yet conversed with her in a very friendly
manner ever after till her death, except, that he did
not bed with her since the time when this scruple first
arose. He marries Anna Bullen. some Months after he was married to Anna
Bullen, by whom he had Elizabeth, who was afterwards
Queen. He abrogates the Pope's supremacy. 
         Anno 1535 the King caused himself to
be declared supream Head of the Church of England,
abrogating thereby all the Pope's Authority in that
kingdom, and John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and
Thomas Moor the Lord Chancellour, refusing to acknowledge
him as such, it cost them their Heads. Yet
would Henry never receive the Doctrine of Luther or
Zwinglius, but continued in the Roman Communion,
because he was mightily exasperated against Luther. 
For Henry had formerly got a Book to be published

under his Name against Luther in favour of the Pope,
for which he acquired the Title of Defender of the
Faith, which Title the Kings of England retain to
this day. But Luther setting aside all the Respect
due to a King, writ an Answer to the same, full of
Heat and bitter Reflections. Yet because he esteemed
the Monks as a sort of people that were not only
useless,Monasteries demolished. but also such as depending on the Pope, might
prove very pernicious to him at home, he gave free
leave to all Monks and Nuns to go out of the Convents
and Nunneries; and by degrees converted unto
his own use the Revenues of all Nunneries and Convents,
Colleges and Chappels, as also those of the
Order of the Knights of st. John of Jerusalem; nevertheless
he employed some part of them in erecting six
new Episcopal sees, and Cathedral Churches, and to
the advancing of Learning in the Universities. A
great part also he gave away or sold for a little Money
to great Families, intending thereby to oblige
them for the future to maintain the alterations he had
made. It is reported, that these Church Revenues
which were so reduced, did amount yearly to 186512 l. 
or as some others will have it, to 500752l. He also
abolished the superstitious worship of Images, and
made some other alterations in Religious Worship, so
that, in effect, he laid the Foundation of the Reformation. 
Nevertheless. England was at that time in a
miserable condition;Protestants and Papists executed. for a great many Roman Catholicks,
that would not acknowledge the King for the
supream Head of the English Church were executed:
And a great many more Protestants received the same
punishment, because they would not own the Corporal
presence of the Body of Christ in the sacrament; tho'
this effusion of blood was not so much caused by the
King as by the Bishops, who had first brought in use such
rigorous Laws, and now executed them with as much
severity. War with scotland. 
          In the Year 1543, another War happened
with the scots, who making an Inrode into England
were beaten by a few English; which did grieve King
James V. to that degree, that he died for trouble,
leaving behind him one only Daughter Mary, whom
Henry would have engaged to his son Edward, thereby

by to unite these two Kingdoms; and the business
was like to have succeeded very well, if the Archbishop
of st. Andrews had not opposed it. Henry also
entered into a League with the Emperour against
France,
         He enters into a League with the Emperour against France. 
          wherein it was agreed, to join their Armies of
80000 Foot and 22000 Horse near Paris, to plunder
that City, and to ravage the whole Country as far as
the Loire. But neither of them acted according to
the Agreement, for Henry wasted his time in the siege
and taking of Boulogne, which he afterwards, by the
Peace concluded in the Year 1546, promised to restore
to France within the space of eight Years, in consideration
of the summ of 800000 Crowns to be paid him
for the same; which was performed accordingly under
Edward VI. 1550. Neither do I believe that Henry was
in good earnest by ruining the French to give such
great advantages to Charles V. After his Divorce with
Catharine of Arragon, he was very unfortunate in his
Marriages;Anna Bullen beheaded. 
          for Anna Bullen was beheaded for Adultery
and Incest, tho' some are of opinion, that it was
more the Protestant Religion than the Crime which
proved fatal to her. It is certain, that the Protestant
Princes of Germany did so resent this matter, that
whereas they intended to have made Henry the Head
of their League, they afterwards would hold no correspondency
with him. His other Wives. After Anna Bullen he married
Jane seymour, Mother to Edward VI. who died in
Child-bed. Then he married Anna of Cleves, whom
he also pretending I know not what bodily infirmity
in her, quickly dismissed. The fifth was Catharine
Howard, who was beheaded for Adultery. The sixth
Catharine Parre, Widow of the Lord Latimer, who
outlived him. Henry died in the Year 1547. §. 20. Edward VI. 
         Edward VI. was nine Years of age when
he came to the Crown, during whose Minority his
Uncle, the Duke of somerset had the Administration
of Affairs. His first design was to force the scots to
agree to a Match betwixt Edward and their young
Queen Mary, wherefore he fell into scotland, and
overthrew them near Muskelborough in a great Battel. 
Nevertheless he missed his aim, for the scots sent their

Queen into France, who was there married to the
Dauphin, afterwards King of France by the Name of
Francis II. Under this King Edward the Reformed
Religion was publickly established in England, and
the Mass quite abolished; which occasioned great disturbances
in the Kingdom, which were nevertheless
happily suppressed. In the Year 1550 there was a
Peace concluded betwixt England, France and scotland,
when also Boulogne was restored to the French. 
But King Edward falling sick, the Duke of Northumberland,
who had before destroyed the Duke of somerset,
persuaded King Edward, under pretence of settling
the Protestant Religion, to exclude by his last Will
and Testament his two sisters, Mary and Elizabeth
(for of the Queen of the scots they made but little account
at that time) from the succession of the Crown,
and to settle it upon Jane Grey, Daughter of the Duke
of suffolk, whom he had by Mary Daughter of
Henry VII. which afterwards proved fatal both to
Jane and the Author. For after the death of Edward,
the Duke of Northumberland caused Jane to be proclaimed
Queen in the City of London;
         155•. but Mary eldest
sister of Edward did immediately lay claim to the
Crown in her Letters to the Privy Council:Lady Jane Grey proclaimed Queen. And Letters
proving ineffectual, they began to come to blows;
but most of the Nobility, unto whom Mary promised
not to make any alteration in Religion, did side with
her; and a part of the Army and Fleet, most of the
Privy Counsellors, and the City of London, taking
her part proclaimed her Queen. Northumberland
himself being now willing to go with the tide, did proclaim
Mary Queen in Cambridge, notwithstanding
which he afterwards lost his Head. §. 21. Mary. Queen Mary caused the Roman Catholick
Religion and Mass, which were abolished in her Brother's
time,Restores Popery. as also the Pope's Authority to be restored
in England, she used the Protestants very hardly, of
whom a great many were punished with death, Yet
was she not able to restore the Church Revenues, for
fear of exasperating the greatest Families, who had
them in their possession. The Pope did also send Cardinal

         Poole, to re-unite the Kingdom to the holy see of Rome. 
This Queen Mary was married to Philip son of
Charles V. Marries Philip of spain. who was afterwards King of spain, yet
under these Conditions, That she should have the sole
disposal of all Offices and Revenues of the Kingdom,
and if a son was born, he should, besides the Crown
of England, inherit Burgundy and the Netherlands:
Don Carlos, who was born of a former Wife, should
be Heir of spain and all the Italian Provinces, and in
case he died without Issue, this should also inherit his
part. But no Children came of this marriage, Mary
being pretty well in Years, for she was thirty Years
before proposed in Marriage. And there were some,
who being dissatisfied at this Match, raised Tumults;
among whom was the Duke of suffolk, Father of
Jane,
         Lady Jane, &c. beheaded. 
          who had hitherto been a Prisoner in the Tower,
but she and her Husband Guilford, and her Father,
paid with their Heads for it. It was within an
ace but that Elizabeth, who was afterwards Queen,
had also undergone the same fate, if Philip and the
spaniards had not interceded for her, not out of any
affection to her person,The reason why Philip interceded for the Lady Elizabeth. 
          but because they knew, that
after her, the next Heir to the Crown of England was
Mary Queen of scotland, who being married to the
Dauphin of France, they feared, lest by this means
England and scotland might be united with France. 
Among other Articles in the Marriage Contract of
Queen Mary, it was agreed, That she should not be
obliged to engage her self in the Wars which her Husband,
Philip, should carry on against France: Notwithstanding
which, when Philip afterwards was engaged
in a War with France, she sent to his assistance
some of her best Forces, who by their Bravery chiefly
obtained the Victory near st. Quintin;
         The Battel of st. Quintin. 
          for which reason
Philip gave the City to be plundered by the English. 
Henry II. King of France, taking hold of this
opportunity,Calais lost. 
          assaulted the City of Calais, under the
Command of the Duke de Guise, which being not
well Garrisoned he took in a few days, and obliged all
the Inhabitants to quit the City, and to leave behind
them all their Gold, silver and Jewels. He also
took afterwards the two Castles of Guisnes and

         Hammes, and thereby drove the English quite out
of France. Not long after this loss Queen Mary
died. 1558. 
        §. 22. Elizabeth. 
         Elizabeth, who after the death of her sister,
was unanimously proclaimed Queen, maintained her
Authority, and governed with great Prudence and
Glory in the midst of a great many threatning dangers
to the very end. In the beginning Philip endeavoured
by all means to keep England on his side, for
which reason he proposed a Marriage betwixt Elizabeth
and himself,Philip desires her in marriage. promising to obtain a Dispensation
from the Pope, which was nevertheless opposed by the
French in the Court of Rome. Elizabeth was very
unwilling to disoblige so great a Prince, who had well
deserved of her; yet on the other side, the same
scruple which had caused her Father to be divorced
from Catharine of Arragon, by a parity of reason, did
remain with her; she considered, especially, that the
said Divorce must needs be esteemed unjust, if the
Pope's Dispensation was allowed of; since it had been
alledged as a fundamental reason of the said Divorce,
that the Pope had no power to dispense in any cases
which were contrary to God's Law: she resolved
therefore not to have any further concerns with the
Pope, and to give a friendly refusal to Philip. Then
she, by an Act of Parliament, constituted the Protestant
Episcopacy, yet not at once, but by degrees,
taking away from the Papists the free exercise of their
Religion, and under several Penalties and Fines obliged
every one to frequent the Protestant Churches on
sunday. Every body also was obliged by a solemn
Oath to acknowledge her the supream Governour in
England, even in spiritual Matters; which Oath was
among 9400, who were possessed of Church Benefices,
taken by all, except 189 who refused the same, among
whom were fourteen Bishops. she kept stedfast to
the established Episcopal Church Government, tho'
she met with great opposition from two sorts of people,
viz. 
         Papists and Paritaus. the Papists and Puritans. These having
conceived a great hatred against Episcopacy, and all
other Ceremonies which had the least resemblance

of Popery, were for having every thing regulated according
to the way of Geneva. Tho' their number
increased daily, yet the Queen kept them pretty well
under. But the Papists made several attempts against
her Life and Crown; for her envious Enemies did erect
several seminaries or schools for the English Nation
in foreign Countries;Poreign seminaries. 
         viz. at Douay, at Rheims, at
Rome and Valedolid; all which were erected for the
Instructing of the English Youth in these Principles,
viz. That the Pope had the supream Power over
Kings, and as soon as a King was declared a Heretick
by him, the subjects were thereby absolved from their
Allegiance due to him, and that it was meritorious
work to murther such a King. Out of these schools
Emissaries and Priests were sent into England, whose
business was there to propagate the Roman Catholick
Religion; but more especially, to instruct the People
in the abovementioned Doctrines. To these associated
themselves some Desperado's, who, after Pope Pius V. 
had excommunicated the Queen, were frequently
conspiring against her Life. But most of them got
no other advantage by it, than to make work for the
Hang-man, and occasioned that the Papists were
stricter kept than before. Mary Queen of scotland. 
         Mary also, Queen of scotland,
raised abundance of troubles against Queen Elizabeth;
she being the next Heiress to the Crown of
England, did, with the assistance of the Duke of Guise,
endeavour to have Queen Elizabeth declared by the
Pope Illegitimate (which the spaniards underhand
opposed) and both she and the Dauphin assumed the
Arms of England, which undertaking proved afterwards
fatal to Queen Mary. For Elizabeth sided
with the Earl of Murray, natural Brother of Queen
Mary, whose main endeavour was to chase the French
out of scotland, and to establish there the Protestant
Religion, both which he effected with the assistance of
Queen Elizabeth. This Queen Mary being after the
death of Francis II. returned into scotland, was married
to her Kinsman Henry Darley, one of the handsomest
Men in England, by whom she had James VI. 
But her Love to him grew quickly cold; for a certain
Italian Musician, whose name was David Ritz
         
was so much in favour with the Queen, that a great
many persuaded Henry, that she kept unlawfull company
with him. He being thus animated, with the
assistance of some Gentlemen, pulled David Ritz out
of the Room where he was then waiting upon the
Queen at Table, and killed him immediately. From
whence King James, with whom Queen Mary was then
big with Child, had this natural infirmity, That he could
not see a naked sword, his Mother having at that time
been frighted with naked swords. This so exasperated
the Queen against her Husband, that he soon after,The Queen of scots married Bothwell, who murthered her Husband. as
was supposed, was in the Night time murthered by
George Bothwell, who was afterwards married to the
Queen. The Earl of Murray, with some others, did
publish, That this Murther was committed by the instigation
of the Queen, and George Buchanan, a Creature of
the Earl's, does boldly affirm the same in his Writings. 
Yet there are some, who say, That the Calumnies as
well concerning David Ritz, as also concerning the
death of Henry Darley, were raised against the Queen
by the Artifices of the Earl of Murray, thereby to defame
and dethrone her. But however it be, there
was an Insurrection made against the Queen, and Bothwell,
whom she had married, was forced to fly the
Land (who died in Denmark some Years after in a
miserable condition) and she being made a Prisoner,
made her escape in the Year 1568. But the Forces
which she had gathered being routed,she was made a Prisoner in England. 
          she retired into
England, where she also was made a Prisoner. There
she entered into a Conspiracy against the Queen Elizabeth,
with the Duke of Norfolk, whom she promised
to marry, hoping thereby to obtain the Crown
of England. But the Plot being discovered, the Duke
was made a Prisoner, but was afterwards released. 
And being again discovered to have afresh pursued his
former design,1572. paid for it with his Head. Queen
Mary was confined to a more close Imprisonment. 
several Treaties were set on foot to procure her Liberty,
but no sufficient security could be given to Queen
Elizabeth. Wherefore Queen Mary growing at last
impatient, and being overcome by ill Counsellours,
entered into a Conspiracy with spain, the Pope, and

the Duke of Guise against Elizabeth: Which Plot
having been long carried on privately, did break out
at last,1586. and some Letters of her own hand writing having
been produced among other matters, a Commission
was granted to try the Queen; by vertue of
which she received sentence of Death; which being
confirmed by the Parliament, great application was
made to the Queen for Execution, which Queen Elizabeth
would not grant for a great while, especially,
because her son James and France did make great intercessions
in her behalf. At last the French Ambassadour
d' Aubespine, having suborned a Ru••ian to
murther Queen Elizabeth, her Friends urged vehemently
to hasten the Execution, which she granted,
and signed the Warrant, commanding, nevertheless,
secretary Davidson to keep it by him till farther order:
But he advising thereupon with the Privy Council,
it was ordered, that Execution should be done upon
her immediately. Beheaded, Queen Elizabeth seemed much
concerned there-at,1587. and removed Davidson from his
place. King James also was grievously exasperated,
and some of his Friends advised him to join with spain
and to revenge his Mother's death. But Queen Elizabeth
found a way to appease his Anger, and there
was ever after a very good understanding betwixt
them to the very last. The Duke of Guise and his
party were great Enemies to Queen Elizabeth in
France,
         Queen Elizabeth assists the Huguenots. 
          and she, on the other hand, assisted the Huguenots
with Men and Money, who surrendered into
her Hands as a pledge,1562. 
         Havre de Grace, but her Forces
were obliged to quit the same in the Year next following. 
Neither could she ever get Calais restored to
her,1559. tho' in the Peace concluded at Chasteau en Cambresis,
the same was promised to her. With Henry
the IVth. she lived in a good understanding, sending
frequently to his assistance both Men and Money. 
But with spain she was at variance about the Rebellious
Netherlanders, to whom she not only granted
a safe retreat in her Country and Harbours, but also
assisted them, first underhand, and afterwards openly,
both with Men and Money, they having surrendered
unto her as a pledge, Flushing, Brill and Rammeken:
         
But she would never accept of the sovereignty of the
Netherlands,
         The sovereignty of the Netherlands twice offered her. which being twice offered her, she refused
as often, out of weighty and wise Considerations. 
she sent, however, the Earl of Leicester, her
Favourite, thither as Governour, who did not acquire
much Reputation; but having put things rather
in confusion, he was recalled in the second Year. 
she did also great damage to the spaniards on their
Coasts, and in the West Indies, by sir Francis Drake
and others,1595. and the Earl of Essex took from them
Cadiz; but quitted it immediately after. On the
other side, spain was continually busie in raising
Commotions and Conspiracies against her. And because
the spaniards were of Opinion, That England
might be sooner conquered than the Netherlands, and
that the latter could not be subdued without the
other, they equipped a Fleet which they called the
Invincible Armado, wherewith they intended to invade
England. 
         The Armado defeated. Which Fleet, to the Immortal Glory of
the English Nation being partly destroied by them,
and many miserably torn to pieces by Tempests, did
return home in a very miserable condition. spain also
supported constantly the Rebels in Ireland, who
were very troublesome to Queen Elizabeth, tho' they
were generally beaten by her Forces, except in the
Year 1596, when they soundly beat the English. 
Wherefore the Queen sent thither the Earl of Essex,
who did nothing worth mentioning. And after his
return, the Queen giving him a severe Reprimand,
and ordering him to be kept a Prisoner, he was so
exasperated at it, that tho' he was reconciled to the
Queen, he endeavoured to raise an Insurrection in London,
         Essex heheaded. 
         
which cost him his Head. Tho' the spaniards
were twice repulsed and chased out of Ireland with
considerable loss, yet the Rebellion lasted till the very
end of her life. Neither could a Peace be concluded
betwixt her and the spaniards as long as she lived:
For tho' a Treaty was appointed to be held at Boulogne,
         1600▪
         
by the Mediation of Henry IV. yet the same was
immediately broke off, because the English did dispute
Precedency with the spaniards. This Queen could never
be brought to take a Resolution to marry, tho'

her subjects did greatly desire it, and she had great
Offers made her; amongst whom were, besides Philip,
Charles Archduke of Austria, Eric King of sweden,
the Duke de Anjou, and his Brother the Duke de Alenson,
the Earl of Leicester, &c. It was her custom
not to give a flat denial to such as sued for her in Marriage,
but she used to amuse them with hopes, whereby
she made them her Friends: For she treated with
Charles Archduke of Austria for seven Years together,
and with the Duke of Alenson she was gone so far, as
that the Marriage Contract was made, yet was it so
drawn as that a way was found to annul the same afterwards. 
Under her Reign the English Trade was
first established in Turkey and the East Indies, the finest
Coin, as also the Manufactury of serges and Bays
was settled in England about the same time. This
Queen also brought first into Reputation the English
Naval strength,she was jealous of her Power at sea. which she was so jealous of, that,
tho' she supported the Netherlanders against the spaniards,
yet would she never consent, that the Netherlanders
should so augment their sea Forces, as that thereby
they might be able to contest with England at sea. 
This Maxim, which seemed so necessary for England,
was not regarded by King James, he being a lover of
Peace: And King Charles I. having always his Hands
full with his Rebellious subjects, was not in a capacity
to observe it; wherefore the Dutch Power at sea,
could neither by Cromwel, nor by Charles II. be
brought down again. This most glorious, and by her
subjects, extreamly beloved Queen died in the Year
1602, having before appointed James VI. King of
scotland, for her successour. §. 23. James I. After the death of Elizabeth, James VI. 
King of scotland, was with an unanimous applause
proclaimed King of England. His Title to this Crown
was derived from Margaret Daughter of Henry VII. 
who was married to James IV. King of scotland;
whose son James V. left one only Daughter, who was
Mother of James VI. He at first shewed himself pretty
favourable to the Papists, fearing, lest they might
in the beginning of his Reign raise some Commotions

against him. Cobham's Conspiracy. Notwithstanding which, immediately
after his Coronation the Lord Cobham, Gray, and others,
entered into a Conspiracy against him: Their main design
was to root out the Line of James,
         1603. and to put in
his place the Marchioness d' Arbelle, she being also
descended from the abovesaid Margaret Daughter of
Henry VII. This Lady was after the death of her Father
married to Archibald Douglass, by whom she
had Margaret, who was married to Ma•thias Earl of
Lenox; and this Arbella being the Daughter of Charles
Lenox, the third son of this Earl, was, by the intercession
of spain, to have been married to the Duke of
savoy, and by this means the Popish Religion was again
to be introduced into England: But the whole
Plot being discovered, the Ring-leaders were punished,
yet not with that severity as the hainousness of their
Crime did deserve; tho' in the Year next following,
all the Jesuits and Popish Priests were, by a severe Proclamation,The Powder Plot. 
banished out of England. In the Year
1605, some Popish Villains had hired a Vault under
the Parliament House, which being filled up with a
great many Barrels of Gunpowder, they intended to
have blown the King, the Prince, and the whole Parliament
into the Air. But this devilish Design was
discovered, for one of the Accomplices, by a Letter
that was obscurely written, and delivered by an unknown
person to a Footman of the Lord Mounteagle,
did intreat him not to come the next day into the
Parliament House: Which causing a suspicion in the
King, all the Vaults were searched, and the Powder
found. Hereupon the Parliament made an Act,
That all subjects, by a solemn Oath, should acknowledge
James for their lawfull sovereign; neither,
that the Pope had any Authority to Dethrone sovereigns,
or to absolve subjects from their Allegiance. 
He concluded a Peace with spain,
         1604. and was afterwards
one of the Mediators of the Truce made betwixt
spain and Holland. His son-in-law, the Elector Palatine
being banished out of his Territories, he assisted
only with sending of Ambassadours and proposing of
an Agreement, all which the spaniards rendered ineffectual. 1626. 
His son Prince Charles was sent into spain
         
to marry the Infanta, where the Marriage Contract
was concluded and confirmed by Oath, but the Nuptials
were deferred till the next year, the spaniards
being willing to gain time, and to see how things
would be carried on in Germany for the House of Austria. 
But when, after the Prince's return into England,
the English would needs have the Restitution
of the Elector Palatine inserted in the Articles, the
Match was broke off, and, tho' the Parliament voted
a subsidie to be employed towards the restoring of the
Elector Palatine, yet the Design came to nothing. Under
this King there was a period put to the Differences
and Wars betwixt England and scotland, which hitherto
had created abundance of Troubles to this Island. 
And that nothing of jealousie might remain betwixt
these two Nations about Preference in the Royal Title,
he introduced the Name of Great Britain, which comprehends
both the Kingdoms. There was also set on
foot a Treaty to unite both Kingdoms into one Body,
but it did not succeed, because the scots would not
be Inferiour to the English. Under this King's Reign
Colonies were established in Virginia,
         Foreign Plantations. 
         Bermudos and
Ireland; by which means the English have extended
their Dominions, but there are some, who believe
that this has weakened the English at home, and that
in all probability, it would have been more profitable
for England to have employed those people in Manufactury
and Fishing of Herrings, which produce such
vast Riches to the Dutch in the very sight of the English. 
Yet some are also of Opinion, That it is good for
the publick repose, that the unruly Multitude do not
grow too numerous in England. The East India Trade
was also greatly promoted at that time, but the English
could not come there in competition with the
Dutch, these having been before hand with them. This
King died in the Year 1625. §. 24. His son Charles I. succeeded him,Charles I. who, after
the spanish Match was broke off, married Henrietta
Daughter of Henry IV. 1626. He equipped out a great
Fleet against the spaniards,
         War with spain. the English landed near
Cadiz, but being repulsed with loss, returned without

doing any thing, and all Commerce was prohibited
betwixt spain and England. 
         War with France. 
          He also broke with
France, and because the French Merchants had been
ill treated by the English, all Commerce was also prohibited
betwixt these two Nations. The English thereupon
endeavoured to send Aid unto the City of Rochelle,
and landing in the Isle of Rhee, besieged the Fort of
st. Martin, which being valiantly defended by one
Toyras, the English were repulsed with great loss. In
the Year next following, they undertook to relieve
Rochelle, but in vain. A Peace concluded with both. Whereupon Charles concluded
a Peace with France in the Year 1629, and in the
Year next following with spain, having by this
War, waged against these two Nations, which were
not so easie to be attacked by one at the same time,
gained no Reputation to the dissatisfied subjects, and
vast Debts. Under this King arose very violent Divisions
betwixt him and the Parliament, which produced
a most strange Revolution in that Kingdom. It
will be very well worth our while,Causes of the intestine Commotions in England. 
          to enquire a little
more narrowly into the true causes thereof. That
wife Queen, Elizabeth, held it for a constant maxim,
to oppose the growing power of spain with all her
might, whereby she weakened spain, and not only enriched
her subjects, but also exercised them in sea
Affairs, wherein consists the chief strength and security
of this Kingdom: Wherefore she always kept a
good Correspondency with all such as were Enemies
of the House of Austria; she assisted France against
the Designs of the spaniards, favoured the Protestant
Princes in Germany, upheld the Dutch against the spaniards,
thereby the better to weaken so formidable a
Neighbour, looking upon the Netherlands as the
Out-work of her Kingdom. Besides this, she finding
continual employment for her subjects abroad, did
not a little contribute towards the preserving the
Health of the state; for by this means a great deal of
corrupt and inflamed Blood being taken away,The different Conduct of Queen Elizabeth and King James as to the state. it prevented
intestine Diseases in the state. But King James
took quite another course, and perceiving that the Ʋnited
Provinces were grown strongh enough, not only to
support themselves against spain, but also to dispute

the Dominion of the Narrow seas with England, he
left them to themselves, and concluding a Peace with
spain, established a lasting Tranquility at home, for
his Inclinations were more for Books than Arms. And
because subjects in general are apt to follow the Inclinations
of their sovereigns, the People laid aside all
Warlike Exercises, and fell into such Weaknesses and
Vices, as are commonly the product of Plenty and
Peace: And the King hoped, when these Nations applyed
themselves only to Trade and Commerce, they
would be diverted from having any thoughts of opposing
his Authority. He made it also his main endeavour
to unite the Minds of the scots and English, by Naturalizing
the English in scotland, and the scots in England,
and by joining the great Families by Marriages:
But he was more especially carefull of establishing one
Form of Religious Worship in both Kingdoms. The Occasions that were taken from Religion. For
tho' there was no great difference in the Articles of
Faith, yet the Ceremonies and Church Government
were very different. For Queen Elizabeth, when she
established the Protestant Religion retained many Ceremonies,
which were anciently used in the Primitive
Church, as also used by the Papists afterwards; she
maintained also the Authority of the Bishops, yet under
the Royal Power; supposing that this Constitution
was most suitable to a Monarchy, considering that
the Bishops had some dependence on the King, and
had their Votes in Parliament. And it used to be the
saying of King James, No Bishop, no King. But this
Constitution did not agree with those of the Reformed
Religion in Holland, switzerland and France, partly
because these Nations were used to a Democratical Liberty,
and therefore loved an Equality in the Church-Government
as well as the state; partly because they
had suffered from some Kings and Bishops, and therefore
both were equally hated by them. These would
not allow of any superiority among the Clergy, but
constituted the outward Church-Government by Presbyteries,
Classes and synods; neither would they admit
any Ceremonies, believing, that the perfection of
the Reformed Religion did consist in not having so
much as anything, tho'never so indifferent, common

with the Papists. And according to this Form the
Church of scotland being established, the number of
such as were of the same Opinion increased daily in
England, who were commonly called Presbyterians
or Puritans. And the Capriciousness of those who
were of several sentiments proved the more dangerous,
because these Nations being of a melancholy
temper used to adhere stedfastly to their Opinions,
not to be removed from them. King James being
besides a great Enemy of the Puritans, thought to
have found out a way to suppress them in scotland,
by inserting it among the Royal Prerogatives, which
was to be confirmed by the Parliament of scotland,
That he had the supream Power both in spiritual and
Temporal Affairs in the same manner in scotland as
in England. By this means he hoped to model,
without any great difficulty, the Church of scotland
according to that of England. And tho' this Proposition
was opposed by a great many in the Parliament
of scotland, yet the King's party prevailed, and a
new Form of Church-Government was established in
scotland. But the King had no sooner turned his
back and was returned into England, but the common
people made an Insurrection against the Bishops in
scotland, who began to introduce there the Ceremonies
of the Church of England. 
        §. 25. The Conduct of Charles I. 
          Tho' King Charles I. was of a more warlike
temper than his Father, yet was he obliged, tho'
against his Will, according to the Maxims of his Father,
to preserve Peace abroad, to avoid the danger of
being obliged to depend on the Capricious Humours
of his subjects. And because he, as well as his Father,
had a great dislike of the Power of the common
people, and of the Temper and Principles of the Puritans,
all his Thoughts were bent to find out ways
how to secure himself from the danger of both: And
because the King could not impose any extraordinary
Taxes without the consent of the Parliament, Charles
chose rather to controul his own Inclinations, which
were bent for War, than to fawn upon the Parliament;
in hopes that its Heats, which was for limiting

the King's Power, would by degrees diminish, if it
was not called together for a considerable time. It is
supposed, that the Lord Treasurer Weston did confirm
him in this Opinion, who did expect to be called to
an account by the Parliament. The Parliament used
anciently to provide a certain yearly Revenue for the
King, towards maintaining his Court and Fleet, to
secure the Commerce of the Kingdom, which Revenue
was not hereditary to the next successour. The
first Parliament which was called by Charles I. had settled
the Customs, as part of his Revenue, but when he
afterwards, having dissolved the same against the Opinion
of the Male Contents, his Revenues also began to be
called in question, it being their Opinion, that nothing
could so soon oblige the King to call a new Parliament, as
if what was necessary for his and the Courts subsistence,
were withheld from him. But the King, however, did
not only receive the same Customs as his Predecessours
had done, but also augmented them with new Impositions
to the yearly value of 800000l. by which
means the King, who was firm in his Opinion, was
thought to have a Design to alter the ancient Constitution
of the Government, and to maintain himself
without a Parliament; which however was looked
upon as an impossibility by the generality of them:
For King James had left above 1200000l. Debts,
which were since increased by Charles 400000l. more,
which Money was expended in the Wars against
France and spain; it was therefore not visible, how
he could extricate himself out of these Debts without
the assistance of a Parliament, since according to the
fundamental Constitutions of the Realm he could not
levy any Taxes upon the subjects, and to force them
to pay any, was beyond his Power, having no Forces
on foot, but the Militia of the Kingdom. And it
was impossible to bring in such a Foreign Force, as
could be supposed to be able to make Head against
the dissatisfied people. Notwithstanding all which
the King pursued his Resolution, and having asked
the Opinion of Men skilled in the Law, who told him,
That it was allowable, for the publick benefit, to levy
Money by his own Authority; he imposed several new

Taxes, whereby he augmented his yearly Revenue
from 500000l. to 800000l. Besides this, he laid a Tax
for maintaining of a Fleet, which amounted to 200000l. 
All which caused great dissatisfaction among the subjects
against the King: Besides, the King was thought
by the Puritans, to deal hardly with them and too mildly
with the Papists (by the Counsel of Archbishop
Laud, a Man of great Resolution, who at that time apprehended,
that Faction very dangerous both to Church
and state which was by the Puritans interpreted, as if
the King was resolved, by suppressing of them, to introduce
Popery; to insinuate this into the Multitude,
abundance of Libels and scurrilous Papers were scattered
abroad against the King and the Bishops, and Commissioners
being appointed to inquire into them, they
were rather exasperated than appeased by its severity. §. 26. Both Nations being therefore full of Discontents,Troubles in scotland and England. 
         
the Flame first broke out in scotland: For
the King endeavouring to root out Puritanism there,
to establish the Authority of the Bishops, and an Uniformity
in Religion, he ordered a Church Liturgy to
be composed, abrogating all Presbyteries, Classes and
Provincial synods, and enjoining every one under severe
penalties, to conform to the same; there was a
general Insurrection raised by that party in scotland. 
There was also another reason;1637. for, at the time of the
first Reformation the Revenues of a great many
Church Benefices were appropriated to the use of the
Crown, but without any remarkable advantage; for
they were lett out, for the most part, to younger
Brothers of Noble Families. These having found the
benefit of them, had, by getting from time to time
the survivorship, continued the same in their Families,
and kept them as their own Propriety. Nay,
they did more than this, for during the Minority of
King James VI. 1567. they had obtained the Titles of Lordships
for some of the most considerable of these, or
some lesser Benefices joined together. King James afterwards
perceiving,1617. that thereby they had bound him
up from rewarding such with these Benefices as deserved
well of him, would have recalled the beforesaid

Grants, but met with such opposition in the Nobility,
that he desisted from it. 1633. But the King undertook the
business effectually, employing the said Revenues towards
the augmenting of the salaries of the Clergy. 
These therefore who had been losers by this Revocation
joined with such Ministers as were mortal Enemies
of the Liturgy, did, with all their might, help to
stirr up the Rebellion. Alexander Lesley, also, who
had been a Commander in the German Wars, and having
refused to serve under John Banniers there, was
returned into his native Country, in hopes to make
his advantage of these Troubles. He put himself at
the Head of the Rebellious Party, and by persuading
the Nobility, that the King intended to take away
their ancient Privileges, stirred up a great many against
the King. And to make a fair shew to the
common people, they made use of the Religious Cloak
of Conscience,The scotch Covenant. ordering a Directory to be composed
by the Ministers quite opposite to the former Liturgy. 
They thereupon entered into an Association▪ confirmed
by solemn Oaths, That they would maintain the
same against all, even the King himself: This Association
was called the Covenant, which being subscribed
by the greatest part of the Nobility and Clergy, a
Council was constituted, unto whom was committed
the supream direction of their Affairs. To suppress
these Commotions, the King sent the Marquiss of Hamilton
into scotland, who dealing mildly with them,
only encouraged the adverse party: For the King calling
a Parliament in hopes to remedy these Disorders,
the Covenant was by its Authority confirmed, the Episcopal
Authority quite abolished, and Puritanism established
in defiance of the Royal Authority. There
being then no other way left to reduce the Rebellious
Party to Obedience but force, and the King being in
want both of Money and a sufficient number of faithfull
subjects, he was forced to make some use of the
Papists to obtain both, wherefore he did not only raise
an Army, wherein were some Papists, but also was
assisted by them with some summs of Money, all
which, however, was in no ways sufficient to supply
the want of the King; and a supply being demanded

from the subjects, very few, except the King's servants
and Officers were for contributing any thing. 
And it being divulged, that a great many thousand of
Irish Papists and Germans were ready for the King's
service, to try, whether by this way the subjects
could be frightened out of some Money, it served only
to exasperate the Minds of the people. Yet the King's
Forces might in all probability have been successfull against
the scots, if they had fallen upon them immediately. 
But because they had leisure given them,
they did not only settle a Correspondency with France
and Holland, from whence they were supplied with
Money and Ammunition; but also sent their Deputies
into England, who so well knew there to represent
the state of their Affairs, that the King being
persuaded by the English, made a dishonourable Agreement
with them: Which nevertheless did not last
long, the Court being ashamed of the Agreement,
and the scots not trusting the King,A Letter intercepted, wherein the scots desire succour from France. 
          the King had
in the mean while intercepted a Letter, wherein the
scots had sollicited for some Officers and Money to be
sent them from France; this he hoped might prove
an inducement to the English to oppose the Treachery
of the scots, and to furnish him with some supplies,
of which he stood in great need at that time. He
calling therefore a Parliament,The Parliament is sactious, and favours the scots. 
          the Letter was read,
but to no great purpose, the Members of the House of
Commons being most of them Puritans, who were
great friends of the scots, so that the Parliament was
a little while after dissolved by the King's Authority. 
The King had caused to be made Prisoner in London
the scotch Commissioner, who had subscribed the abovementioned
Letter, whereupon the scots took up
Arms, and took the Castle of Edinburgh. The
King having with great difficulty, for want of Money,
got together an Army, went in person against the
scots, but as a party of his Army endeavouring to
force their passage was beaten back with loss, which
augmented the Discontents of his subjects, the
souldiers for want of Pay, being to be maintained by
those Counties where they were quartered. Besides
this, ten thousand Men, which were raised by the

Parliament in Ireland for the King's service, were
forced to be disbanded for want to Pay. There was
then no other remedy left but to make a Truce with
the scots, and to call a new Parliament in England,
which began to sit in November in the Year 1640. §. 27. But in the session of this Parliament,The Parliament of England directly oppose the King. the
Ulcer which had been long gathering in the Minds of
the people broke out: For the Parliament, in lieu of
assisting the King against the scots, entered into a Confederacy
with them, promising a monthly subsidy towards
the maintaining of the scottish Army, which
was to be ready at the English Parliament's command. 
Then they began to reform the states, to clip the
King's Authority, to punish his Ministers and servants,
and to take away the Bishops, Liturgy, and
fall upon Papists. The better to obtain their aim,
they forced the King to consent, that he would not
dissolve the Parliament, till all such as were criminal
were punished, and the state were entirely reformed:
In a word, that they should have the liberty to sit as
long as they pleased. Which in effect put an end to
the Royal Authority. To try the King's Patience,
and their own strength, they brought, the Earl of
strafford, Lord Deputy of Ireland, to his Tryal, who,
notwithstanding he made a good Defence, and the
King did his utmost to preserve his beloved and faithfull
Minister, yet the Rabble of London, then encouraged
by the House of Commons, making an Insurrection,
he received sentence of Death in the House
of Lords. And the King refusing to sign the Warrant
for his Execution, was obliged thereunto, partly
by the importunity of the Parliament, partly by the
Insurrection of the Rabble of the City of London, and
partly by a Letter from the Earl, desiring him to do
it. Then the rest of the King's Ministers went to
rack, some of them saving themselves by flight, some
being imprisoned. The Bishops were excluded from
the House of Lords. The star-chamber, the Authority
of the Privy Council, and the High Commission
were suppressed: the Customs and power over the Fleet
were taken away from the King. some of these and

some other things, which proved very prejudicial to
him, the King was forced to grant them, in hopes
thereby to heal the ulcerated Minds of the people. 
He went also in person into scotland, where he granted
them all what they could desire. About the same
time a horrid Conspiracy broke out among the Irish
Papists, who pretended to maintain the Popish Religion,
and to redress some Grievances by force of Arms,
which occasioned afterwards a most cruel slaughter. At
last it came to an open Rebellion:1642. For the Parliament
not ceasing to encroach daily more and more upon the
Royal Authority,The Rebellion begins. the King resolved to assert his Authority;
wherefore he summoned five Members of Parliament,
whom he accused as Traitors, and authors of all the
Differences: And the House of Commons taking their
part, the King went into the House accompanied with
some Officers, and spoke to them with a due resentment
of their Behaviour,Their Behaviours which however they made
but little account of, being not ignorant of his want of
Power, of which he seemed to betray himself, when he
immediately afterwards condescended and came nearer
their Expectations. The House of Commons thereupon
stirred up the neighbouring Counties, and especially the
London Apprentices, who made such an Insurrection,
that the King, not thinking himself safe in London, retired
into the Country. And the Parliament ordered all
the Governours of the sea-ports, not to obey the King's
Commands. It was certainly a great errour in the
King, that in such troublesome times, he had not taken
care to secure to himself the sea-ports, by which
means he might have hoped for some assistance from
abroad: For, when the King intended to possess himself
of the Fort and Harbour of Hull, he was not admitted;
so that there was nothing left, but that the
Parliament had not as yet taken from the King
the disposal of Offices. But for the rest it was evident,
that their Intention was, to abolish totally the
Royal Power, and to introduce a Democracy. And
after the King had once given his Assent to the exclusion
of the Bishops from the House of Lords, where
they had six and twenty votes, and the rest of the
King's Friends had once absented themselves from both

Houses, it was easie for the remainder quite to abolish
the Authority of the House of Lords. Thus, after
there had been long contests by Words and Writings
betwixt both parties, the King now as well as the Parliament
began to Arm themselves: And the King having
at several times, at first, beat the Parliament Forces,
the Parliament stirred up the scots, entring with them
into a Confederacy. Whereupon the scots came with a
considerable Force to the assistance of the Parliament,
which turned the scale, the King's Forces being routed
near York, and he obliged, for want of Men and
Money, to give himself up to the protection of the
scots,
         The King made a Prisoner. who nevertheless did surrender him to the English
for the summ of 400000l. under condition that
he should not be abused by them. The King was afterwards
carried a Prisoner from place to place for a
considerable time. §. 28. By these means the Puritans or Presbyterians,The Independents become Masters. 
had, under the pretext of Religion, overthrown
the Royal Power: But that they could not long enjoy
their usurped power, was occasioned by a certain
sect that called themselves Independent, because they
would not depend on any certain from of Faith, or
spiritual, or Temporal Constitutions, nor acknowledge
any of the same, whereby they opened a door
for all sorts of Fanaticks, to come under their Protection. 
These, under pretence of a particular holy
Zeal, had not only got a great sway in the Parliament,
and had been against any peaceable accommodation,
proposed by others; but also by their cunning
insinuating way crept into the chief Civil and Military
Employments: For in the place of the Earl of
Essex, Thomas Fairfax was made General, and Oliver
Cromwell Lieutenant General over the Army, the last
of which was the Head of the Independents, a sly and
cunning Fox. And out of this party all vacant places
were supplied in Parliament. The Presbyterians therefore
perceiving that the Independents began to be very
strong in the House, and that most Military Employments
were in their Hands, proposed in the House,
That one part of the Army should be sent into Ireland,
         
that some Forces only should be kept in England,
and the rest be disbanded. Cromwell made use of this
to stirr up the souldiers, telling them, that they were
likely to be disbanded without pay, or else to be
starved in Ireland. Thereupon the souldiers entered
into an Association among themselves, taking upon
them not only the Military, but also all the Civil
Power, they took the King from the Parliament into
their own custody, pretending they would give him
his liberty, but made themselves Masters of the City
of London, and acted in every thing at discretion. For
they quickly after broke off the Treaty with the King,
and a great many of the subjects, who were not able
to bear their Tyranny, taking up Arms were dispersed
by Cromwell, who also beat the scots that were come into
England to the assistance of the King, making their
General Hamilton a Prisoner. But during the absence of
Cromwell, the Parliament had re-assumed the Treaty
with the King, and the business was carried on so far,
that there was no small hopes of an Accommodation,
when the souldiers, headed by Ireton, son-in-law to
Cromwell, broke off the Treaty, taking Prisoners such
Members of the House as did oppose them: so that
there were not above forty Members left in the Parliament,
and those were either Officers, or at least, favourers
of the Army. These decreed, That no Treaty
should be set on foot for the future with the King;
That the supream Power was to be lodged in the People,
which was represented by the House of Commons;
But the Regal Power, and the Authority of the House of
Lords should be quite abolished. Then they ordered a
Court of 250 persons to be erected,The King is sentenced to death and executed. by whose Authority
the King was to be summoned, sentenced and
punished, notwithstanding that the generality of the
people looked upon this Court as an abominable thing,
some Presbyterian Ministers cried out aloud against it
in the Pulpits; the scots protested against it, and the
Dutch Ambassadours, and other Princes did their utmost
to oppose it. Before this Court, where sat among
the rest, a great many of very mean Extraction,
the King was accused of High Treason, Tyranny, and
of all the Murthers and Robberies committed since

the beginning of these Troubles. And the King, as
in justice he ought to do, refusing to acknowledge its
Authority, was sentenced to be beheaded, tho' there
were but 67 of these pretended Judges present, the rest
abominating the fact, had absented themselves, among
whom was Fairfax. But the King, having
been miserably abused by the souldiers, was beheaded
with an Ax upon a scaffold erected for that purpose
before Whitehall. 
         1648. 
        §. 29. Ireland conq•ered. 
          After the death of the King the outward
shew of the supream Power was in the Parliament,
but in effect it was lodged in the Generals of the Armies. 
Their first design was to banish the King's son
and the whole Royal Family, and to suppress all such
as adhered to him. Cromwell was sent into Ireland,
where the Royal Party was as yet pretty strong, which
Island was reduced in the space of one year by Cromwell's
good Fortune and Valour. In the mean while the scots
had proclaimed Charles II. tho' under very hard Conditions,
their King, who also arriving there safely out of
France, whither he was gone for shelter, was crowned
King of scotland. The Parliament thereupon recalled
Cromwell out of Ireland, and having made him
General (for they had deposed Fairfax whom they
mistrusted) sent him into scotland, where he beat the
scots several times, but especially gave them an entire
defeat near Leith, taking, among other places, the
Castle of Edinborough, which was hitherto esteemed
impregnable. The King, in the mean while, having
gathered a flying Army entered England, in hopes
that a great many English would join with him: But
he was deceived in his hopes, very few coming to him,
and Cromwell overtaking him with his Army near
Worcester,
         Charles II. r••ted. 
          his Forces were routed and dispersed; so
that he was forced to change his Cloaths in his flight,
and after a great many dangers was miraculously saved,
and escaped, by the help of a Merchant-ship, into
France. The King being thus driven out of the
Island, the scots were entirely subdued under the Conduct
of General Monk, who was sent thither by
Cromwell, who having imposed upon them very hard

Conditions,The scots c•nquered. according to their deserts, intirely subjected
them to the English. This done, the Parliament
began to take into consideration, how to disband
part of the Army, and to quarter the rest in the
several Counties. But Cromwell sent away that Parliament,
which had been the cause of so much troubles,
and constituted a new Parliament, consisting of 144
Members, most of them being Fanaticks and Enthusiasts;
among whom Cromwell had put a few cunning
Fellows, who being entirely devoted to his service,
did make the rest dance after his pipe. These
having first let these silly wretches go on in their own
way, till by their phantastical Behaviour they had
made themselves ridiculous and hated by every body,
then offered the supream Administration of Affairs to
Cromwell;
         Cromwell made Protectour. who having accepted of the same under
the Title of a Protectour, selected a Privy Council,
wherein were received the Heads of the several sects. 
Thus they who had shown so much aversion to the
Royal Power, and hatched out a Monarch of their
own, who, without controul, ruled the three Kingdoms
of England, scotland and Ireland at pleasure. 
Cromwell, to have a fair pretence to keep on foot his
sea and Land Forces, which were the Foundation of
his Power,1652. began a War with the Dutch, who seemed
to despise this new Monarch: But Fortune was so favourable
to Cromwell in this War, that he took above
1700 Merchant men from the Dutch, and beat them in
five sea Engagements, in the last of which the Dutch
lost Martin Tromp, and twenty seven Men of War. 
The Hollanders then were obliged to beg for Peace,
and to accept of such Conditions as were proposed to
them; among which, one was, That the Province of
Holland should exclude the Prince of Orange for ever,
from succeeding in his Father's place. Another was,
That they should not receive the banished King Charles II. 
into their Territories. Which some alledge as a reason,
that he was always ready afterwards to revenge
himself upon them,1660. tho' at his return into the Kingdom,
they endeavoured with aboundance of flattery to
make amends for the former affront. It is very likely
also, that the King was suspicious, that the Dutch
         
had fomented the Differences betwixt his Father and
the Parliament. Cromwell acquired so much Glory by
this War, that most Princes sent their Ambassadours
to him as if he had been a lawfull sovereign, and desired
his Friendship. He was no less fortunate in discovering
several Plots which were made against him:
For which purpose he entertained his spies every
where, even near the King's person; having besides
this, a cunning way to draw the people over to his
party, and to suppress such as envied his Fortune
He sent also a Fleet into the Mediterranea•, wherewith
he curbed the Pirates on the Coast of Barbary. 
Another was sent into the West Indies, where his Designs
against st. Domingo and Hispaniola miscarried,
but Jamaica he took from the spaniards, notwithstanding
that a great many of his Men were taken off
by sickness; and he did considerable mischief to the
spaniards by ruining their silver Fleet. He sent some
Auxiliary Troops to the French in Flanders, who, in
recompence, surrendered to him Dunkirk. He died
in the Year 1658, having been as great and formidable
as ever any King of England. He was a great
Master in the Art of Dissimulation, knowing how to
make his advantage of Religious Pretences; wherefore
he gave liberty of Conscience to all sectaries,
whereby he not only got their Favours, but also by dividing
the people into several Opinions, he prevented
their easily joining against him. §. 30. King Charles II's Restauration. After the death of Cromwell this unlawfull
and violent form of Government could not be of a
long continuance: For tho' his son Richard succeeded
him in the Protectorship (this was the Title used by
Cromwell, having refused the Name of King) yet was
he in no ways capable to bear such a weight. Wherefore
he was soon deposed by the Parliament, which
being divided within it self, Monk, who was then Governour
of scotland, took this opportunity, and marching
with an Army out of scotland into England, possessed
himself of the City of London, dissolved the Military
Parliament, and recalled King Charles II. into
his Kingdom. 1660. This King did restore the ancient Form

of Government in the Kingdom both in spiritual and
Temporal Matters, for his subjects were ready to gratify
him in most respects, as having been taught by
Experience, That the Frogs who despised to have a
Block for their King, got afterwards a stork for their
Master. This King, who judged, that the Greatness
of England did chiefly depend on the Dominion of
the seas and Commerce, which was disputed by no
body but the Dutch, did, in all probability, bend all his
Thoughts that way, viz. How to make these proud
Merchants more pliable, his hopes being grounded upon
what he had seen Cromwell do against them. 
Wherefore he began a War with Holland,
         War with Holland, 1665. which was
carried on at first with equal losses on both sides: But
the English at last taking a Resolution to tire out the
Dutch without coming to an Engagement, they ventured
at a bold stroke, and to the great dishonour of
the English, entered the River of Thames, firing some
ships at Chattam. This obliged the King to make a Peace
with them by the Mediation of swedeland, tho' the great
success of the French Arms in Flanders may probably
have contributed a great deal towards it. Yet it seems
as if ever since he had kept up a Resolution of Revenging
himself upon them, he being also again exasperated
by the Rable in Holland, who affronted him
afterwards. He therefore in the Year 1672 attacked
the Dutch at sea, whilst the King of France made
War against them by Land. But this War did not
succeed according to his expectation; for the Dutch
did not only take from the English a great number of
Merchant-ships, but also the English could not master
the Dutch in any of these sea fights, partly, because
the French would not fall on in good earnest, partly,
because the Dutch acted very circumspectly, not giving
any opportunity to the English to make a Descent
either on Holland or Zealand. It is possible that
the King's Intentions may perhaps have been frustrated
by some Intrigues at home. And because the English
Nation began to grow very jealous of the great
successes of France, the King was obliged to make a
separate Peace with Holland,
         1674. and afterwards was received
as a Mediatour betwixt the Parties then engaged in
War against one another. 
§. 31. Constitution of the English Nation. The English Nation is very populous and
fruitfull: There are some who have reckoned, that in
England are 9913 Parishes, in each Parish 80 Families,
which make 778183 Families, and seven persons
reckoned to each Family amounts to 6470800 souls,
among which number it may be supposed to be above a
Million of Men capable of bearing of Arms. This Nation
is also very fit to settle Colonies in Foreign Countries,
because the English, as soon as they are in the
least settled in a place, they quickly marry, and remain
there for their life time. Whereas other Nations,
if they go into far distant Countries, go only with an
intent to get a little Money, which they afterwards
love to spend in their Native Country. The English
are also Courageous, Brave, not fearing Death. For in
former times their Land forces were much superiour to
the French, and ever since the times of Queen Elizabeth,
when they first began to apply themselves in earnest
to the sea, they have not been inferiour in skill
and Courage to any Nation in the World, except that
the Dutch may be compared with them in sea Affairs. 
But this is to be observed of the English Valour, that
they commonly are very Furious and Brave at the beginning,
yet great Hardship, Famine, and other Inconveniencies
they are not so well able to endure with
Patience, as being used to live in great Ease and Plenty
in their own Country. Wherefore Maurice Prince
of Orange used to put the English, that were sent
to his assistance, upon desperate Enterprizes, before
(as he used to say) they had digested the English Beef. 
They are also very dexterous in Woollen and silk Manufacturies,
and are generally great Improvers of
other Arts and Mysteries: Yet they are also somewhat
Highminded, inclining themselves to Diversion,
which is the reason that they do not so much
Work as otherwise they might; and yet they expect
to be paid for their idle Hours as well as the
rest, which is the reason why they sell their Wares
at a higher rate than others, and that they envy
such French Handycrafts-men, who live among
them, and are seldom diverted from their daily Labour
by any Pleasures. They being generally of

a melancholy temper, makes them very Ingenious,
and when they apply▪ themselevs to any science,
they make great progress in the same, if they hit
the right way. But by the same rule, because there
happens often to be an ill mixture of this melancholy
temper, abundance of Fanaticks and Enthusiasts
are to be found among them, who having formed
to themselves Opinions out of ill-grounded Principles,
adhere so stedfast to them, that they are not by any
ways to be removed from them. Wherefore there is
not any Nation under the sun, where more different
and more absurd Opinions are to be met withall in
Religion than in England. The loose sort of people
are addicted to Thieving and Robbing upon the
High-way, wherefore the Hangmen are always busie
in England. This Nation also loves to eat and drink
extreamly well; tho' there are some who will have it,
that the English have got their way of drinking so plentifully
from the Netherlanders in the Wars of the Low-Countries,
and from thence have brought that ill
Custom over into England, which before, they say,
was not in use there. Their own Histories are sufficient
evidences, that they have been always inclined to
Rebellion and intestine Commotions. Wherefore
their Kings can never be secure, except they keep a
watchfull Eye over the restless spirit of the People. §. 32. Constitution of the scotch Nation. The scots are reported to have a share
of Pride and Envy in them. They are very apt to
propose to themselves great Matters, and to delight
in their own Inventions. They are good Land-souldiers,
and can endure more hardship than the English,
neither are they so much addicted to their Belly, both
which they have from the barrenness of their Native
Country. They are very Revengefull, and intestine
Broils among the Noble Families were formerly very
common among them: For it was a custom, that
each Family used to select one for the Head of the
Family, unto whom they almost paid more respect
than to the King himself, and if any one of the Family
had received an Injury, he made complaint
thereof to the Head of his Family: And if the Head

of the same Family did resolve to revenge the Injury,
the whole Family, under the Conduct of their Head,
fell upon the Family of the Aggressour with Fire and
sword. Which abominable Custom King James VI. 
did endeavour to abolish. Besides this, they are easily
stirred up to Rebellion, very obstinate in defending
their Opinions to the utmost. Their fruitfulness in
Children makes them seek other Countries, since their
Country can scarce maintain them all at home. There
is another reason also to be given for this, which is the
right of the First-born, whereby the eldest son is Heir
of all the real Estate of his Father, the rest of the Brothers
being obliged to be satisfied with their share in
the Personal Estate. These then being obliged to advance
themselves as well as they can, apply themselves
either to the Wars or study: Wherefore most
Ministers in scotland are said to be younger Brothers
of good Families. But in England it is no shame for
the younger Brothers of such Families to be Merchants. 
In former times, before scotland and England
were united under one King, the scottish souldiers
were in great esteem, because the French made
constantly use of them in their Wars, and at home
they were always picquering with the English: But
afterwards they grew careless of Warlike Exercises,
and especially when Cromwell subdued them, their ancient
Glory was quite obscured. The scots are also often
very Ingenious, and well versed in the Latin
Tongue. And at that time, when all Liberal sciences
were suppressed in Europe by a long Barbarism, the same
were kept up in scotland, which did furnish several other
Nations with Learned Men, who instructed them
in these sciences. But as the scots, which live in the
low Countries, on the south-side, are well civilized, so
those who inhabit the Mountains, who are called
Highlanders, as also the Inhabitants of the Orkney
and Western Islands, are very raw and uncivilized. §. 33. Of the Irish. 
          The Irish are commonly esteemed to be a
fool-hardy and ill sort of people; very lazy, yet pretty
hard in undergoing the Fatigues of War. They
are very obstinate, and never to be bent from their Opinion. 

After Ireland was conquered by King Henry II. 
abundance of English settled themselves in that Kingdom,
whose numbers increased from time to time to
that degree, that scarce the fourth part of the Island
remaine in the possession of the ancient Inhabitants. 
And because most of the Irish adhere to the Popish Religion,
they did not only rebel under Queen Elizabeth,
but also under the Reign of King Charles I. entered into
a most horrid Conspiracy against the English living
among them, of whom, 'tis said, they murthered
200000 within the space of six Months: But when the
English had recollected themselves, they again killed
about 100000 of them. Cromwell had once a mind
to have rooted out the whole Nation, as being quite
incorrigible and past hopes of any amendment. Wherefore
he sent some thousands to the King of spain, under
condition, that none of them should return into
the English Dominions. He used also to plague them
every way, so that they are become a miserable Nation. §. 34. The Condition of Great Brittainy. 
          Concerning those Countries which belong
to the King of England, the Kingdom of England is a
Rich and Fertile Country, abounding in every thing,
either for the Necessity or Pleasures of Mankind, except
Oyl and Wine, and such other Commodities as
do not grow in the other parts of Europe, are of the
growth of that Country. But else they have great
numbers of very fine Horses, and good Cattle, especially
the best sheep of all Europe, which make the best
part of the native Riches of England, bearing so good
a sort of Wooll, that an incredible quantity of the
best Cloath is made in England, and from thence every
Year transported into Foreign Parts. These sheep
feed in great Flocks in the Country without as much
as a shepherd, there being no Wolves to be met withal
in England; the reason of which, as 'tis reported, is,
that King Edgar, about the Year 940, did order a certain
number of Wolves to be paid by the Prince of
Wales to him as a yearly Tribute, by which means the
Wolves were quite destroied in England: Tho' it is also
very probable, that the great English Mastiffs have

been very instrumental in this point, it being certain,
that for Fierceness and strength they surpass all the
rest in the World. A great quantity also of Lead, but
especially of the finest Tin is to be found in England,
which surpasses in goodness all others in that kind. 
The sea also is very profitable to the English, since it
produces a great quantity of Fish, which are daily
catched by the Inhabitants. Tho' by the Negligence
and Laziness of the ancient English, who did not apply
themselves industriously to Fishing, they have lost
a great part of that advantage: But the Netherlanders,
from ancient times, have made use of this advantage,
and got vast Riches by the Fishery of Herrings
and Cods, giving only a small Gratuity to the
English, in case they have occasion to dry their Nets
on their shores; tho' oftentimes the English, envying
the Netherlanders, will force them to pay more than
ordinary, which has several times served as a pretext
for a War betwixt both Nations. Besides this, the
sea is extreamly advantageous to England, for thereby
the English being separated from their Neighbouring
Nations, cannot easily be attacked; whereas
they may easily invade others: And because this
Island is situated almost in the very middle of Europe,
in a narrow sea, where all ships which either go
East or Westward must pass by; and having, besides
this, a very deep Coast and commodious Harbour, it
lies most convenient for Commerce and Trade, which
the English carry on in most parts of the World, and
the Dutch hitherto have been the only obstacle that
they are not become Masters of the whole Trade of
the World. For it proves very disadvantageous to
the English, that they love to eat and drink well, and
that in great quantity, and by reason of their love of
Ease, they are •ain to employ double the number of
seamen in their ships, of what the Dutch do; and besides
this, they will not be contented with a small gain:
Whereas the Dutch live very sparingly, do not refuse
the Penny, and therefore are easier to be dealt withall
than the English. They import a great deal of raw
silk into England, which being wrought in the Country,
mightily encreases their Riches. In the same

manner they do with their Woollen Manufactury
now, whereas before the times of Henry VIII. they
used to transport most of their Wooll into the Netherlands,
where it was wrought, and turned to the great
advantage of those Cities. But this King perceiving that
his own subjects might as well make the same benefit of
it, he set up the Woollen Manufactury in his Kingdom,
which increased prodigiously, afterwards, when at the
time of the Troubles in the Netherlands, a great many
of these Weavers did settle themselves in England. The
Riches of England also are, as it seems, not a little increased,
because it is not permitted there to any Body to
carry any Gold or silver of their own Coin out of the
Land, except it be perhaps to the value of ten pound
sterling for a Traveller. But scotland does not come near
England, neither in Fertility nor Riches, having not
any Commodities fit for Exportation, except salt-fish,
salt, Lead and Coals. The Western and Orkney
Islands also produce nothing but Fish. Ireland abounds
in Cattel, and especially in sheep, tho' the Irish Wooll
is not so fine as the English, but for the rest it is a fertile
and plentifull Country. In America belong to the
English Crown, the Islands of Bermudos, Virginia and
New England, and some of the Caribby Islands, whither
the English have sent their Colonies, and have also
begun to settle themselves on the Continent of Guiana. 
The Product of these Countries is chiefly Tobacco,
sugar, Ginger, Indigo and Cotton. They have
also a Colony in the Island of Jamaica, from whence
the English Buckaneers and Privateers do great mischief
to the spanish West Indies. For it is a custom
with the English, That tho' they are at Peace with the
spaniards in Europe, they do them, nevertheless, all the
Mischief they can in the West Indies. Tangier King
Charles II. got as a Dowry with the Infanta of Portugal. 
Lastly, The English also are possessed of some places
in the Banda Islands, and thereabouts in the East
Indies, which are of no small consequence to them. §. 35. The Form of the Government in England. 
          The Constitution of the Government in
England is chiefly remarkable for this, that the King
cannot act at pleasure, but in some Matters is to take

the Advice of the Parliament. By this Name is to be
understood the Assembly of the Estates of England,
which is divided into the Higher and the Lower House. 
In the first sit the Bishops and the Lords, in the latter
the Deputies of the Cities, and of the 52 Counties
or shires, into which the whole Kingdom of England
is divided. The first origin of the Parliament, as
'tis related, was this, That the former Kings of England
did grant great Privileges to the Lords, by whose
assistance they had conquered the Country, and kept
the common people in obedience. But these in conjunction
with the Bishops growing too head-strong,
proved very troublesome, especially to King John and
Henry III. wherefore, to suppress their Insolence, Edward
I. took part with the Commons. And whereas
formerly, out of each County or shire two Knights and
two Citizens only were called, to represent their Grievances,
which having been debated by the King and
the House of Lords, they used to receive an answer
and to be sent home again: This King Edward called
together the Commons, and consulted with them concerning
the publick Affairs; tho' there are some who
will have their origin to be much more ancient. This
House, after it was once established, did extreamly
weaken the Authority of the Lords, and in process of
time did not a little diminish the Regal Power; for
ever since that time the Rights of the People were
maintained with a high hand, the House of Commons
imagining, that the sovereignty was lodged among
them, and if the Kings refused to gratify them in their
Requests, they used to grumble at their proceedings. 
And because the Power of the Parliament is not so
much established by any ancient Laws as Precedents
and Customs, this is the reason why it is always very
jealous of its Privileges, and always ready to make out
of one single Precedent a right belonging to it ever after. 
This Parliament the King is obliged to call together
as often as any extraordinary Taxes are to be levied
(for the Parliament did assign this King, at first,
for his ordinary Revenue, 1200000l. per annum,
which has been considerably augmented since) or any
old Laws are to be abrogated, or new ones to be made,

or any alteration to be made in Religion. For concerning
these matters the King cannot decree any thing
without consent of the Parliament. The Parliament
also used to take into consideration the state of the
Kingdom, and to present their Opinion to the King,
yet is the same of no force till approved of by the King. 
It often also calls into question the Ministers of state,
concerning the Administration of publick Affairs, and
inflicts Punishment upon them, with the King's approbation. 
And it is a common rule in England, that
whatever is committed against the Constitutions of the
Realm, is done by the Ministers and Officers; for the
King, they say, does never amiss, but his ill Counsellours,
which is not altogether contrary to Truth. But
if the Parliament should pretend to transgress its
bounds, the King has power to dissolve it; yet
ought the King also to be cautious in this, lest he should
by an unseasonable Dissolution of the Parliament exasperate
the People. §. 36. The Power and strength of England. 
          If we duely consider the Condition and Power
of England, we shall find it to be a powerfull and
considerable Kingdom, which is able to keep up the
Balance betwixt the Christian Princes in Europe; and
which depending on its own strength, is powerfull enough
to defend it self. For, because it is surrounded
every where by the sea, none can make any attempt
upon it, unless he be so powerfull at sea, as to be able
entirely to ruine the Naval Forces of England. And
if it should happen, that the English Fleet were quite
defeated, yet would it prove a very hard task, to transport
thither such an Army, as could be supposed to be
superiour to so powerfull a Force as the English Nation
is able to raise at home. But England ought to take
especial care, that it fall not into civil Dissentions, since
it has often felt the effects of the same, and the seeds of
them are remaining yet in that Nation; which chiefly
arises from the difference in Religion, and the fierce
Inclinations of this Nation, which makes it very fond
of Alterations. Nevertheless a Wise and Courageous
King may easily prevent this evil, if he does not act against
the general Inclination of the People, maintains

a good Correspondency with the Parliament; and for
the rest is very watchfull, and as soon as any Commotions
happen, takes off immediately the Ringleaders. 
Lastly,With relation to other states. 
         England and scotland being comprehended in one
Island, whose chiefest strength lies in a good Fleet, it
is evident, that this King need not make any great account
of such states as either are remote from the sea,
or else are not very powerfull in shipping. Wherefore,
as the King of England takes no great notice of
Germany (except as far as it relates to France or spain)
of Poland and other such like states; so it is easie for
him to curb the Pirates on the Barbary Coast: Which
Nests of Pirates might have been easily destroyed long
ago, if they had not been let alone on purpose to render
the Trade in the Mediterranean difficult to the
Hamburgers, and some others. England has nothing
to fear from Portugal; and this must rather hope for
assistance from England and Holland against spain. 
The Naval strength of the Northern Crowns,To the Northern Crowns. 
         England
need not be jealous of, as long as the same is divided. 
Yet it cannot be for the Interest of England, if one of
those Kings should become absolute Master of the East
sea, or that they should be fain to depend on the Discretion
of the Dutch. 
         To spain. since the Naval strength of
spain is mightily decaied England need not fear any
thing from thence: Yet does it not seem to be the Interest
of England to fall out with that Kingdom, considering
what a vast Trade the English have into spain;
for spain does either consume the English Commodities
at home, or else exchanges them for silver, by
sending of them into America. There are some who
have computed, that in case of a War with spain, the
English would lose in effects above thirty Millions;
and besides this, their Trade into the Levant and other
places, would be greatly endangered by the Privateers
of Ostend, Biscay, Majorca and Minorca, who at the
time of the Wars under Cromwell took 1500 Merchant-ships
from the English. 
         To France. Tho' the Land Forces
of France are now-adays much superiour to the English,
this Island both for its bigness and strength making
up not above a third part of France; yet the Naval
strength of France has hitherto not been able to

come in competition with the English. It is the chiefest
Interest of England, to keep up the Balance betwixt
France and spain, and to take a special care that
the King of France do not become Master of all the
Netherlands; for it is visible, that thereby his Power
at sea would be encreased to that degree, that he
might enter on a Design of being even with England,
for what they have formerly done to France. Holland
seems to be the only obstacle that the English cannot
be sole Masters of the sea and Trade,To Holland. tho' for the rest
they have no reason to fear the Dutch by Land, but only
at sea, because the Dutch Land Forces are not so considerable,
as to be able to undertake any thing of great
moment. Nevertheless, how desirous soever the English
are to be sole Masters at sea, yet does it not seem to
be the Interest of England, frequently to engage it self
in Wars with Holland, it having been observed, that
the Dutch, since the Wars with England are rather increased
in Valour, Experience, and Power at sea. And
because other Nations are not likely to suffer that Holland
should be swallowed up by the English, or that
one Nation should have the Monopoly of Europe; it
seems therefore the best method for the English, to let
the Dutch trade as well as themselves, and to set some
others upon their Backs, which may give them so
much work as thereby to give a check to their growing
Greatness, and in the mean while, take care to establish
their own Power at sea, and Commerce abroad▪
But least of all it would be for the Interest of
England, if Holland should be brought under the Yoak
of the French King, who, without question, by the
additional sea Forces of Holland, and the advantage of
the East India Trade, would be superiour in Power to
any in Europe. 
        "
"10","CHAP. V. Of FRANCE. §. 1. The most ancient stare of France. 
          As far as we can search into the most ancient
Histories, it is evident from th•nce, That
Gaul, now called France, has been a very powerfull
and populous Country. For the Gauls in ancient times
had conquered a great part of Italy, where they settled
themselves; who also, when they had over-run Greece
and some other neighbouring Countries, inhabited a part
of the Lesser Asia, which was called from them Galatia
or Gallo-gracia: Yet formerly this so powerfull
Country did never either rightly understand or exert
its own strength against other Nations, because it was
not then under the Government of one Prince, but divided
into a great many p•••y states, which were always
at variance with one another. This much facilitated
the Conquest of the Romans over them, who
else stood not in fear of any Nation so much as the
Gauls. 
         Gaul subdued by the Romans. 
          And tho' the incomparable Valour of Julius
Caesar was chiefly instrumental in subduing this Nation,
yet with t•n Legions he had work enough to effect it
in ten Years time. But as soon as the Romans had
brought this fair Country under their subjection▪ they
emploied all means to suppress the Martial spirit of
this Nation, in which they succeeded as well in this as
in other Nations, it being their Custom to civilize and
refine the Manners of these Nations, thereby to render
them soft and e••eminate. After France had been
near 500 Years under the Dom•nion of the Romans, it
fell, under the Reign of the Emperour Honorius, into
the Hands of the Barbarous Nations. By the Barbarous Nations. For the Goths,
after they had over-run Italy, settled themselves in
Gallia Narbonensis, and the Burgundians, conquered
a considerable part of the rest. But the Franks entring
this Kingdom, settled and maintained themselves
in it, giving it the Name of France, after their
own Name. These Franks, were for certain, Germans,
tho' some of our Modern French Writers pretend to

demonstrate, That this Nation was a Colony of the
ancient Gauls, who being overstocked with People at
home, passed over the Rhine, and having settled a Colony
in Germany, after several hundred Years, returned
into their Native Country. That the Franks came out of Germany. 
          But it is more probable,
That the Franks are the same Nations which were formerly
encompassed by the Rivers of the Mayn, the
Rhine, the We•er, and the sea; and which in Tacitus's
time were called salii, Bructeri, Trisii, Angrivani,
Chamari, sigambri and Chatti, and who having entered
into a mutual Confederacy against the Romans,
called themselves, in spite of their Power, Franks, or
a free People, as not doubting but to be able to defend
their Liberty against them. The origin of the French Language. And it is certain, that
they did transplant the German Tongue into France,
which was for a great while after in fashion among
persons of the best Quality, till at last they used themselves,
by degrees, to the Latin Tongue, formerly introduced
by the Romans, which being corrupted by
the German Tongue produced the modern French
Language. It is also evident, that the Race of the
ancient Gauls was not quite extinguished, but that
both Nations were by degrees united in one, yet with
this difference, that the Frankish Families made up
the Body of the Nation. §. 2. But howsoever this be,Pharamond the first King. all Historians agree
in this, That the Franks did choose for their King, about
the Year 424, Pharamond, who established among
them wholsome Laws and Constitutions; yet
most are of Opinion that not this Pharamond, but his
son Clodion,
         Clodion. sirnamed Long-hair, invaded Gaul; who,
after he had been several times repulsed by Aetius the
Roman General, at last took Artois, Cambray, Tournay,
and some other places as far as the River somme,
making Amiens his place of Residence. He died in
the Year 447;Merovaeus. but his successour and Kinsman Merovaeus,
in conjunction with the Roman General Aetius
and Theodorick the King of the West Goths having
beaten Attila, the King of the Hans out of France,
extended his Dominions as far as Mentz on one side,
and on the other side conquered Picardy, Normandy,
         
and the greatest part of the Isle of France. The Romans
themselves contributed to this loss, for that not only in
the Battel fought against Attila, they had lost a great
many of their best Forces, but Aetius also being fallen into
disgrace with the Emperour Valentinian, was by him
murthered; which Aetius may be justly said to have
been the last great Captain the Romans had; there being
after his death no body left who could resist Merovaeus. 
From this King sprang the first Race of the
French Kings, which is called the Merovigian Family. 
He died in the Year 458. Childerick. His son Childerick,
for his Lasciviousness, was banished; in whose stead
one Aegidius of the ancient Race of the Gauls was set
up for King. But Childerick, through the faithfulness
of his Friend Guyeman, was after an Exile of eight
Years, recalled out of Thuringia, whither he fled, and
restored to his Throne; who drove back the Britains
and saxons, that made at that time great havock in
France. He also conquered that part which is now
called Lorrain, and took Beauvais, Paris, and some
other places near the Rivers of the Oise and the seyne. 
He died in the Year 481. Clouis I. His son Clouis or Lewis,
having killed syagrius, the son of Aegidius, established
the French Monarchy, and added great Territories to
the Kingdom. This King fell in love with Clotildis,
of the Royal Race of Burgundy, who promised to
marry him▪ if he would turn Christian. Which, however,
he afterwards delayed to perform, till the Alemans,
who would have got a footing in France, entered
that Kingdom, whom he meeting with his Army
near Zulick, a bloody Battel was fought, where,
when he saw the French began to fall in disorder, he
vowed, That if he obtained the Victory, he would be baptized;
which Vow,496. after the Victory he performed,
being baptized at Reims by st. Reim, whose example
the whole Nation of the French followed. This King
also overturned the Kingdom of the Goths, which they
had established in Languedock; uniting that Country
with his Kingdom: He also conquered several petty
Principalities, and a part of the Higher Germany. He
died in the Year 511. 
§. 3. France is divided. After the death of Clouis, France received a
signal blow, the Kingdom being divided among his
four sons; who, tho' they annexed the Kingdom of
Burgundy to it, yet this division weakened this Kingdom,
and administred Fuel to the following intestine
Dissentions. Nay, this impolitick dividing the Kingdom
went further still; for they subdivided the Kingdom
again among their sons, which occasioned most
horrible civil Commotions in France, these Kings endeavouring,
as it were, to out-do one another in Iniquity:
And among the rest, the two Queens Brunechildis
and Fredegundis are infamous for their monstrous
Crimes. At last, after a great many intestine
Divisions. Clotarius II, 
         Clotarius II. re-uniting the divided Kingdom,
did somewhat restore its ancient state. 614. He died
in the Year 628. Dagobert. But his son Dagobert fell into the
same Madness; for he not only gave part of the Kingdom
to his Brother Albert, but also divided his own
share among his two sons; neither did he do any
thing for the Benefit of the Publick during his Reign. 
From this time the French Kings quite degenerated
from their ancient Valour, giving themselves over to
Laziness and Debauchery. Wherefore the Grand Mareschals
of the Kingdom did by degrees assume the
Power and Administratinon of Publick Affairs. Among
these Pipin was famous, descended of a Noble
Family in Austrasia, who had the Administration of
Affairs during the space of twenty eight Years, under
several Kings. Char•es Martell. 714. His son Charles Martell succeeded his
Father in his Power and Office, which he rather augmented,
after he was grown famous by his Martial
Exploits, having chased away the saracens, who about
that time, conquering spain, fell also into France,
of whom he killed a vast number. 732. This Man took
upo• himself the Title of a Prince and Duke of France,
so that nothing remained with the Kings but the bare
Title and an empty Name, they being kept in the
Country, and once a Year carried for a show through
the City, to expose them to the view of the People
like strange Creatures. At last, Pipin the Younger,
son of this Charles Martell (who died in the Year 741)
having brought the great Men of the Kingdom over

to his Party, deposed King Childerick II. and having
sent him into a Convent,Pipin proclaimed King. got himself proclaimed King
of France. This was approved easily enough by Pope
Zachary, because he being in fear of the growing
Power of the Longobards in Italy,
         The Merovingian Family loses the Crown. did endeavour by
all means to oblige the King of France to come to his
Assistance. And thus the Merovignian Family loses
the Crown of France. 
         751. 
        §. 4. Pipin,
         Pipin's Expeditions. to convince the World that he was
not unworthy of the Crown, or else to furnish the
People with other Matters than to talk of the deposing
of Childerick, undertook an Expedition against
the saxons, whom he vanquished in a great Battel. 
And he had likewise, under the Reign of the former
Kings, undertaken several Expeditions into Germany
with great success, and subdued some of the Nations
bordering upon the Rhine. Not long after an Opportunity
presented it self to make himself famous in Italy,
For Aistulphus, the King of the Lombards, had
proposed to himself the Conquest of all Italy; after he
had chased the Governours of the Grecian Emperours,
which were then called Exarches, out of Ravenna,
and all other places which were under their Jurisdiction,
and was ready to march directly against Rome:
The Pope stephen III. being in great fear of this Enemy,
and not knowing where to find Assistance,
craved Aid of Pipin,
         He assists the Pope against the Lombards. 
          whom he at last persuaded to
take his part against Aistulphus. In this War Pipin
recovered from Aistulphus all what he had before taken
from the Grecian Emperours in Italy, the Revenue
of which, he, as 'tis pretended, gave to the Roman
see, reserving to himself, as it is very probable,
the sovereignty over these places. He gained, by this
Action, the Reputation of being very Zealous; and
by bestowing these Revenues upon the Holy Chair,
got a firm footing in Italy, and the advantage of
swaying Matters there according to his Pleasure. He
made also Tassilo, Duke of Ba•aria, his Vassal, and
beat the Duke of Aquitain. This Pipin died in the
Year 768, leaving behind him two sons, Charles and
Carolomannus, who divided the Kingdom betwixt

them. But Carolomannus dying quickly after, the
whole Kingdom fell to Charles. 
         Charles the Great. This Charles was
justly sirnamed the Great, he having carried the French
Monarchy to the highest pitch of its Greatness, none of
his successours having been able to attain to the like,
tho' some of 'em have aimed at it. For having routed
Desiderius, the last King of the Lombards, who
endeavoured to recover what was formerly taken from
Aistulphus, he conquered the Kingdom, and brought
it under his subjection. 774. He also subdued Germany,
having routed Tassilo, who had taken upon him the
Title of King of Bavaria. He also waged War against
the saxons, for the space of 32 Years, whom he
at last brought under his Obedience▪ obliging them
to embrace the Christian Faith. For which purpose
he erected several Episcopal sees and Monasteries, by
the help of the Priests, to reform the ba•barous Manners
of this savage People. He also beat the sclavonians,
Danes and Huns, and took from the saracens a
part of spain, as far as to the River Iberus; tho' his
Forces, in their return home, were overthrown near
Ronceval, where was also slain the famous Rowland. 
This Charles was in the Year 800,He is proclaimed Emperour of the Romans. 
          at Christmas, being
then at Rome, proclaimed Emperour by the People,
by the Instigation of the Pope, in st. Peter's
Church. Tho' he gained nothing by this Title, except
it was the sovereignty or Protection of the Roman
Church, and the Patrimony of st. Peter, if both
did not belong to him before, for all the rest he enjoied
before under other Titles. He died in the
Year 814. §. 5. After the death of Charles the Great, the
French Monarchy began to decline again, because his
son Lewis sirnamed the Pious,
         Lewis the Pious. was more fit to be a
Priest, than a souldier: And it is certain, that so vast a
Kingdom, where the new Conquests were not yet well
settled, did require a Prince of a Military spirit. And
notwithstanding he had the good Fortune to force
some of the Rebellious Nations to return to their Duty,
yet he committed, afterwards, two fatal Oversights,
when in his life time he gave to his sons the

Titles of Kings,He divides his Kingdom. and divided the Kingdom betwixt
them. The first of which proved pernicious to himself,
the second to the Monarchy. For these impious
and ungratefull sons were not for staying for their Father's
Death,His sons Rebell. but Rebelling against him, and made
him, after he was deserted by every body, their Prisoner. 
The Bishops, who were by him kept under
strict Discipline, after they had condemned him,
forced him to resign the Government. 833. But the great
Men of the Kingdom quickly repenting, restored him
to his Throne, and he also pardoned his sons. He
died in the Year 840, having before his Death made a
new Division of the Kingdom betwixt his sons; the
Effects of which appeared soon after to the World,
when Lotharius, the elder Brother, who also had the
Title of Emperour, undertook to take from his Brothers
their Portion; against whom, the two other Brothers,
Lewis and Charles entring into a Confederacy,
forced him to divide the Monarchy with them, having
first obtained a bloody Victory near Fountenay
unfar Auxerre, in which Battel were slain above
100000 Men, and among them the Flower of the
French Nation. Germany divided from France. In this Division Germany fell to
Lewis's share, which ever since has continued separate
from France, and has made a distinct Empire. But
the younger Brother,Charles the Bald. 
         Charles sirnamed the Bald, got
for his Portion the greatest part of France, viz. all
that part which lies betwixt the Western Ocean and
the Meuse; but the eldest Brother obtained Italy, Provence,
and all those Counties which are situated betwixt
the Meuse, Rhine, and the some. Under the
Reign of this Charles the Bald,
         The Normans make an Irruption into France,
          the Normans (so they
called the Danes and Norwegians) fell, with a considerable
Force, into France, making great Havock
where-ever they came: And the Kingdom was weakned
to that degree, by the last bloody Battel, and its
being divided into so many Principalities (for the sons
of Lotharius had also shared their Father's Provinces
among themselves) that it was not strong enough to
chase out of its Dominions these Robbers, but was
obliged,912. under Charles sirnamed the simple, to give into
their possession the Province of Neustria, which they called

after their Name, Normandy. The sons of Lotharius
dying without Issue, Charles the Bald and the sons of
Lewis shared their Part betwixt them, out of which
Charles got Provence. At last Charles obtained the
Title of Emperour, and died in the Year 877. His
son Lewis sirnamed Balbus,
         Ludovicus Balbus. succeeded him, who dying
soon after, left the Kingdom to his two sons,
who were very young,Ludov. III. and Carolomannus. 
         viz. to Lewis III. and Carolomannus;
from whom Lewis King of Germany took
Lorrain. Lewis dying in the Year 882, as did Carolomannus
in the Year 884, none was left but a Brother
of theirs by the Father's side, viz. the son of
Lewis sirnamed Balbus, who being then a Child of
five Years of Age,Charles the simple. was afterwards called Charles the
simple. For at that time the Authority of the Kings
of France was decaied to that degree, that it was a
common custom to give them sirnames according to
the several defects of Body or Mind, as were obvious
in them. He was, during his Minority, committed to
the Tuition of his Cousin Carolus Crassus, who also had
the Title of Emperours, who not long after, because
he was very infirm both in Body and Mind, was deposed,
and died in the Year 888. The decay of the Royal Authority. The Royal Authority
being thus decaied, and nothing but Divisions
found in the Kingdom,The Excessive Power of the Nobles. the great Men of the Kingdom
mightily increased their own Power, so that,
whereas they used formerly to be Governours of their
Provinces under the King's Command, they now began
to claim them as a Propriety belonging to themselves,
independent of the King. It is related by
some, That the Kings at that time had nothing left
but Rheims and Laon which they could really call
their own; which Evil could not be totally suppressed
by the following Kings, till several hundred Years after. 
After the Death of Carolus Crassus,
         Eudo Count of Paris crowned King of France, 923. 
         Eudo Count
of Paris got himself to be crowned King, and waged
War with Charles the simple, but died in the Year
898:Rudolf of Burgundy crowned King▪
           
          Yet Charles the simple, quickly found another
Rival for the Crown. For Rudolf King of Burgundy,
got himself to be crowned King of France, making
Charles the simple his Prisoner, who died during his
Imprisonment. 929. After the Death of Rudolf (which

happened in the Year 936) reigned Lewis IV. Lewis Outremer. sirnamed
Outremer, because he had, during the Imprisonment
of his Father, sheltered himself in England. This
King's Reign was full of intestine Commotions; he
died in the Year 954, leaving for his successour his son
Lotharius,
         Lotharius. who likewise reigned in continual troubles
till the Year 985,Lewis the Fainthearted. leaving behind him his son Lewis
sirnamed the Faint-hearted, of whom the French Historians
only say this, that he did nothing. He had
for his Tutor and Administrator of the Kingdom,
Hugh Capet Earl of Paris. 
         987. After this King's Death,
his Uncle, viz. Lewis sirnamed Outremer's son, laid
claim to the Crown, but was disappointed in his Pretensions
by the great Power of Hugh Capet. He afterwards
endeavoured to maintain his Right by force of
Arms, but was made a Prisoner, and dying in Prison,
put an end to the Carolinian Race,The Carolinian Family extinguished. or at least, to its
Inheritance of the Crown of France, which had been
in its possession for at least 236 Years. It is very remarkable,
that this Family lost the Kingdom through
the same Errour which the former lost it. For tho'
this Family, by prodigious Conquests, had raised the
Power of France, yet were the Conquests soon after,
by the Divisions made of the Kingdom again dis-united,
and even a considerable part quite separated from
that Kingdom, and annexed to the German Empire▪
Besides this, by the Negligence of these Kings, and
the excessive Power of the great Men in the Kingdom,
France was reduced to a very low Condition. §. 6. As Hugh Capet,
         Hugh Capet, the first of the present Race. the first Founder of the present
Royal Family, obtained the Crown, not so much
by right of succession as by the assistance of the chief
Men of the Kingdom, who excluded the right Heir;
so (as it is very probable) he was obliged to remit a
great many of the ancient Royal Prerogatives, and to
confirm to the great Men of the Kingdom the Power
of governing their Provinces, with the Titles of Dukes
and Earls, under condition that they should acknowledge
themselves Vassals of the Kingdom, yet not
be obliged to depend absolutely on the King's Commands;
so that France at that time was like a

mishapen and weak Body. Hugh, in the mean time,
re-united to the Crown (which at that time had scarce
any thing left which could be called her own) the
County of Paris, the Dutchy of France, wherein was
comprehended all that lies betwixt the Rivers of seine
and the Loire, and the County of Orleans. Among
the great Men of the Kingdom, the chief were the
Dukes of Normandy (on whom also depended Britainy)
of Burgundy, Aquitain and Gascoigne; the Earls
of Flanders, Champaign and Tolouse, the latter of
which was also Duke of Languedock: But the Counties
of Vienne, Provence, savoy and Dauphine belonged
to the Kingdom of Arelat, which was a part of the
German Empire. Yet these Kings had at last the
good Fortune to see all these Demi-sovereign Princes
extinguished, and their Countries re-united to the
Crown of France. Hugh died in the Year 996, whose
son Robert,
         Robert. a good natured Prince, reigned very peaceably,
he having reduced the Dukedom of Burgundy,
to which, he, after the Death of his Uncle, was the
next Heir, under the entire Jurisdiction of the Crown. 
The Tyranny exercised by the Pope against this King
ought to be mentioned here. For, the King having
an Intention of marrying Bertha, of the House of
Burgundy, which Match was esteemed very beneficial
to his state, and the said Bertha standing with him in
the fourth degree of Consanguinity; besides that, he
had been Godfather to a Child of hers in her former
Husband's time: He desired and obtained the Consent
of his Bishops, the said Marriage being otherwise against
the Canon Law. The Pope excommunicates him and his Kingdom. But the Pope took hence an
occasion to Excommunicate the King and the whole
Kingdom, which proved so mischievous, that the
King was deserted by all his servants, except three or
four, and no Body would touch the Victuals that
came from his Table, which was therefore thrown to
the Dogs. He died in the Year 1033. The Reign of
his son Henry was also not very famous,Henry I. except that
he waged some inconsiderable Wars against his Vassals. 
He presented his Brother Robert with the Dukedom of
Burgundy, from whence comes the Race of the Dukes
of Burgundy descended from the Royal Blood. He

died in the Year 1060. Philip I. His son Philip did nothing
memorable; he was also for his Marriage excommunicated
by the Pope, but at last obtained a Dispensation. 
Under the Reign of this King Philip, William
Duke of Normandy conquered England,
         Will. Duke of Normandy conquers England. 
          which proved
to be the occasion of unspeakable Miseries to France;
for these two Kingdoms were ever after in continual
Wars, till the English were driven out of France. About
the same time the first Expedition was undertaken
into the Holy Land,
         Expedition into the Holy Land. 
          which Extravagancy continued
for near 200 Years after. The Popes drew the
most Benefit from these Expeditions, assuming to
themselves, an Authority, not only to command, but
also to protect all such as had listed themselves under
the Cross. Under this pretext also frequent Indulgences
were sent abroad into the World, and what
was given towards the use of this War, was collected
and distributed by their Legates. The King of France,
and other Kings, received thereby this Benefit, That
these Wars carried off a great many turbulent spirits:
And a great many of the Nobility used either to sell
or else to mortgage their Estates; and if any of them
happened to die in the Expedition, leaving no Heirs
behind them, their Estates fell to the King. By this
means also, that prodigious number of People, wherewith
France was overstocked at that time, was much
diminished, whereby the Kings got an Opportunity
to deal more easily with the rest. Nevertheless, when
afterwards the Kings, either by Instigation of the
Popes, or out of their own Inclinations, undertook
these Expeditions in their own Persons, they found
the dismal effects of it. For, by so doing, the best of
their subjects were led to the slaughter; and yet it
was impossible to maintain these Conquests as long as
they were not Masters of Egypt: Whereas, if this
Kingdom had been made the seat of the intended
Empire, and the store-house of the War, a Kingdom
might have been established, which would have been
able to support it self by its own strength. This
King died in the Year 1108. Lewis the Fat▪
          His son Lewis sirnamed
the Fat was always at variance with Henry I. King of
England, and in continual Troubles with the petty

Lords in France, who did considerable Mischiefs from
their strong Castles; yet he was too hard for them at
last,Lewis VII. and died in the Year 1137. His son Lewis VII. 
sirnamed the Younger,
         His unfortunate Expedition to the Holy Land. 
          undertook, upon the Persuasion
of st. Bernhard, an Expedition into the Holy
Land, but this proved a fatal Expedition, for by the
Defeat which he received at Pamphylia, and the siege
of Damascus, which he was forced to quit, and the
Fatigues of so great a Journey, as well as the perfidiousness
of some of the Commanders, after he had
ruined a great Army, he returned with the miserable
Remainders into France, without having done any
thing answerable to such an Undertaking: But he
committed the greatest Error, when he divorced himself
from his Lady Eleonora, whether out of Jealousie
or tenderness of Conscience is uncertain, she being his
Cousin in the third or fourth degree. This Eleonora
being also the only Heiress of Aquitain and Poictou,
was immediately after married to Henry Duke of Normandy,
afterwards King of England, the second of
that Name, who, by this Match annexed these fair
Countries to the Crown of England. In fine, having
been kept in a continual alarm by his petty Vassals,
but especially by Henry II. King of England. He
died in the Year 1180. §. 7. His son Philip II. sirnamed Augustus,
         Philip II. the Conquerour. or the
Conquerour, was at first engaged in a War against
Henry II. King of England, from whom he took several
considerable places; which, however he restored
afterwards to his son Richard, with whom he entered
into a League to retake Jerusalem from the saracens,
pursuant to which,Another Expedition to the Holy Land. 
          both the Kings went thither in
Person with a considerable Force. But a Jealousie arising
betwixt these two Kings, nothing was done
worth mentioning; for Richard accused Philip, that
he had an ill design against him in sicily, in their
Voyage; besides that, he had refused to consummate
the before intended Match betwixt his sister and Richard:
Wherefore, as soon as Ptolemais had been taken
by their joint Forces, Philip, under pretence of
sickness returned into France, leaving only with Richard,

Hugh III. Duke of Burgundy, with some
Troops; who envying Richard, hindered the taking
of the City of Jerusalem. After his return from that
unfortunate Expedition to the Holy Land, he undertook
a War against Richard,
         War betwixt France and England. 
          which he also carried on
against his Brother John, wherein Philip had much
the better of the English, for he took from them Normandy,
the Counties of Anjou, Maine, Touraine, Berry
and Poictou. He was very instrumental in deposing
the Earl of Tholouse, who, because he had taken into
his Protection the Albigenses, was excommunicated
by the Pope. Philip also obtained a great Victory
near Bouvines, betwixt Lisle and Tournay, against the
Emperour Otho IV. who being joined with the Earl of
Flanders, attacked him with an Army of 150000 Men,
whilst the King of England was to fall into France on
the side of Aquitain. This King was so successfull in
his Wars against England, that his son Lewis was very
near obtaining the Crown of England. And tho'
he was chased again out of England, yet did he, after
his Father's Death,1223. pursue his Victories against the English
in France, taking from them, among others,
the City of Rochelle. 
         Lewis VIII. But this Lewis VIII. did not
reign long, for he died in the Year 1226, leaving for
successour his son Lewis IX. Lewis IX. sirnamed the Holy, during
whose Minority, his Mother Blanch of Castile had
the supream Administration of Affairs; and tho' some
of the Nobility raised great Troubles against her, she
subdued them all by her singular Prudence. In the
Year 1244, the City of Jerusalem was ransacked by
some Persians, who called themselves Chorasmii,
Lewis being about the same time dangerously ill,
made a Vow, That if he recovered he would undertake
an Expedition against those Infidels; which he afterwards
performed. A third Expedition to the Holy Land without success. But before his departure he issued
out his Proclamation throughout the Kingdom, intimating,
that whoever had received any damage by
his souldiers, should have Restitution made him,
which was performed accordingly. In this Expedition
he took the strong City of Damiata; but the overflowing
of the River Nile, hindered him from taking
Grand Cairo. After the River was returned to its usual

Bounds, he vanquished the Enemy in two Battels;
but they having received new Reinforcements, cut off
the Provisions from the French, who were also extreamly
pestered with the scurvy. The King then
resolved to retreat towards Damiata, but in his March
thither they attacked him, gave him a terrible overthrow,
and took him Prisoner, yet released him again
for a Ransom of 400000 Livres, he being obliged to
restore also to them the City of Damiata. Thus he
marched with the Remainders of his Army, which
from 30000 Men was mouldered away to 6000, to
Ptolemais, where, after he had given what Assistance
he could to the Christians,1254. he at last returned home. 
Under the Reign of this King,The first Pretensions of the French upon the Kingdom of Naples. 
          
         France got first an
Opportunity to intermeddle in the Affairs of Italy,
from whence, yet this Kingdom never reapt any great
Benefit. Manfred, natural son of the Emperour
Frederick II. having first killed King Conrad his Brother,
made himself King of Naples and sicily. But
the Pope, on whom this Kingdom depended as a
Fief, being dissatisfied with Manfred, offered the same
to Charles Earl of Anjou, Brother of Lewis IV. King
of France, which he having accepted of, was crowned
at Rome,
         1261. with Conditon, that he should pay to
the Pope 8000 Ounces of Gold, make a yearly Present
of a White Horse, as an acknowledgment; and
if he was chosen Emperour, that he should not unite
that Kingdom with the Empire; the Pope being unwilling
to have any one more powerfull than himself
in Italy. Charles thereupon vanquished Manfred,
and having murthered him and his Children, took
possession of the Kingdom. The young Conradin,
Duke of swabia, came with an Army to recover the
Kingdom, which was his Inheritance, from his Grandfather,
but having been overthrown in a Battel near
the Lake of Celano,
         1268. was made a Prisoner, and in the
Year next following, had his Head cut off at Naples,
upon the Instigation of the Pope, who being asked
by Charles, What he had best to do with his Prisoner?
answered, Vita Conradini, mors Caroli; Mors Conradini,
vita Caroli; i. e. The Life of Conradin is the
Death of Charles; The Death of Conradin the Life

of Charles. And as by the Death of this young Prince
was extinguished the Noble Race of the Dukes of swabia,
so this Charles laid the first Pretensions of France
to the Kingdom of Naples. In the mean while, King
Lewis being not satisfied with his former unfortunate
Expedition against the Infidels,An unfortunate Expedition of s. Lewis. 
          resolved to try again
his Fortune against Tunis, either because he found,
that this place lay very convenient for his Brother's
Kingdom of sicily, or because he hoped thereby to
open a way for the Conquest of Egypt, without which,
all the Expeditions into the Holy Land, were likely to
prove ineffectual. But in this siege he lost a great
part of his Army by sickness, and he died himself
there in the Year 1270. From a younger son of this
Lewis IV. viz. from Robert Earl of Clairmont, sprang
the Bourbon Family, which now sways the scepter of
France. 
        §. 8. Philip the Hardy. His son Philip sirnamed the Hardy succeeded
him, under whose Reign that considerable Earldom
of Tholouse was united to the Crown of France. Alfonsus
son of Lewis IX. who had married the only
Heiress of this Country, happening to die without Issue,
in an Expedition into Africa. Under the Reign also
of this King fell out the so much celebrated sicilian
Vespers,
         The sicilian Vespers. whereby all the French were at one blow extirpated
out of sicily. The Business was thus; some
Frenchmen had ravished the Wife of John of Porchyta,
born at salerno, who, enflamed with Revenge,
did seek for Aid of Pieter King of Arragon, hoping,
by his Assistance, to drive Charles out of sicily; the
sicilians also being very averse to the French, who had
committed great Outrages in that Kingdom. Pope
Nicholus V. lent a helping hand, who stood in fear
of the Power of Charles; as did also Michael Paleologus
the Constantinopolitan Emperour, because Charles
had made some Pretensions to that Empire. John
therefore, disguised in a Monks Habit, travelled about
from place to place, till he had brought his Design to
Perfection. It was next to a Miracle that the Design
was not betraied in three years time, it having been
so long a forming in several places▪
         1282. At last it was

put in Execution, it being agreed upon, that in the
second Holyday in Easter, at that very time when
the Bells rung in to the Vespers, all the French
throughout the whole Kingdom of sicily should be
massacred at once, which was done accordingly, within
two Hours time with great Barbarity, no person
having been spared in the Massacre. Which being
done, Pieter King of Arragon possessed himself of the
Kingdom of sicily. And, tho' the Pope ordered the
Croisade to be preached up against Pieter, and declared
Charles, the second son of Philip King of Arragon,
and this Philip marched with a great Army to put
his son into possession, yet it did prove labour in vain,
and Philip died in the Year 1285. Philip the Handsom▪
          His son and successour
Philip sirnamed the Handsom, upon some frivolous
Pretences,1292. began a War with the English, taking
from of them the City of Bourdeaux, and the greatest
part of Aquitain, which however they soon after recovered
by vertue of a Peace concluded betwixt them. 
Not long after he attacked the Earl of Flanders,
         He has ill success in Flanders. 
          who,
by the Instigation of the English had entered into a
Consederacy with a great many neighbouring Lords
against him, from whom he took most of his strong
Holds. But the Flemings, being soon tired with the
Insolencies committed by the French, cut in pieces
the French Garrisons; whereupon the King sent an
Army under the Command of Robert Earl of Artois,
to reduce them to Obedience;1302. but he was defeated
near Courtray, there being 20000 French slain upon
the spot, which happened chiefly by a Misfortune, that
the Cavalry was misled into a moorish Ground. It is
related, that the Flemings got above 8000 gilt spurs as
a Booty from the French. 
         1304. And tho' afterwards there
were 25000 killed of the Flemings, yet they quickly
recollecting themselves, raised another Army of 60000
Men, and obliged the King, by a Peace made betwixt
them, to restore them to their ancient state. This
King Philip also, with consent of the Pope, suppressed
the rich Order of the Knights Templers, and died in
the Year 1314. He suppressed the Templers. 
          Whom succeeded his three sons, each in
his turn, who all died without Issue, and without
doing any thing of moment. Lewis X. The eldest, Lewis X. 

sirnamed Hutin, died in the Year 1316; whose Brother
Philip sirnamed the Tall,
         Philip the Tall. had a Contest for the
Crown with his deceased Brother's Daughter Joan,
she being supported by her Mother's Brother, the
Duke of Burgundy, but it was determined in favour
of Philip by vertue of the salick Law. Under this
King the Jews were banished out of France, they having
been accused of poisoning the Fountains. He
died in the Year 1322. Him succeeded the third Brother
Charles IV. Charles IV. sirnamed the Handsom, under whose
Reign all the Italians and Lombards, who being Usurers,
did exact upon the People, were banished the
Kingdom. A War also was begun in Aquitain against
the English, but these Differences were quickly composed
by the Intercession of Queen Isabella, sister of
Charles. He died in the Year 1328. §. 9. After the Death of this King;Philip of Valois. 
         France was for
a great many years together torn in pieces by very unfortunate
and bloody Wars, which had almost proved
fatal to this Kingdom:His Title conte•ted by Edward III. of England, and in what ground. For a Contest arose about the
succession, betwixt Philip of Valois, Philip the Handsom's
Brother's son, and Edward III. King of England,
the above-mentioned Philip the Handsom's
Daughter's son. The former pretended a right by
vertue of the salick Law, which excludes the Females
from the succession: But the latter, tho' he did not
deny the salick Law, yet did he alledge, That this
Law did not barr from the succession the sons born of
the King's Daughters. And it was certain, that he
was nearer a kin to the deceased King than Philip,
neither could any Precedent be brought where a son
of the King's Daughter had been excluded from the
succession to admit his Brother's son: Yet the Estates
of France declared for Philip, partly upon the persuasion
of Robert Earl of Artois, partly because they
were unwilling to depend on England. And tho' King
Edward did dissemble at first, this Affront, and came
in person to do homage to Philip for his Provinces
which he was possessed of in France; yet not long after
he began to show his Resentment, the French having
obliged him at the time when he performed the

Ceremony of Homage, to lay aside his Crown, scepter
and spurs. Besides, the states of England did persuade
him not so easily to let fall his Pretensions, and
Robert Earl of Artois, being fallen out with Philip about
some Pretensions concerning the County of Artois,
did stir up King Edward to undertake a War against
France. In the mean time while Philip had defeated
the Flemings, who were risen in Rebellion against
that Earl, to that degree, that of 16000 Men not one
escaped the sword. War with England. 
          In the Year 1336 the English began
to make War against France, which was carried
on for some Years with equal Advantage on both
sides, and was interrupted by several Truces; till at
last Edward landed with an Army in Normandy, and
outbraving the French, approached to the very Gates
of Paris. But Edward making soon after his Retreat
through Picardy towards Flanders, was overtaken by
Philip near Albeville,
         Battel near Crecy. 
          where a bloody Battel was
fought betwixt them. The French Forces being extreamly
tired by a long March gave the English an
easier Victory. Besides this, some Genoese Foot retreated
immediately, their Bows having been rendered
useless by the rainy Weather; which the Duke
d' Alenzon perceiving, and thinking it to have been done
by Treachery, fell with a Body of Horse in among
them, which caused the first Confusion. The English also
made use of four or five pieces of great Cannon against
the French, which being never seen before in France,
caused a great terrour in the French Army. several
French Lords also being not well satisfied with the
King, were glad to see him defeated. This Victory
is the more remarkable, because (according to the
French Historians) the English were not above 24000
strong, whereas the French were above 100000. Out
of which number 30000 Foot souldiers were slain,
and 1200 Horsemen, among whom was the King of
Bohemia. This King, tho' he was blind, yet charged
the Enemy on Horseback betwixt two of his Friends,
who had tied his Horse to theirs, and they were all
three found dead together. The next day there was
a great slaughter made among some French Troops,
who not knowing what had passed the day before,

were on their March to join the French Camp. After
this Battel the English took Calais,
         The English take Cal•is. 
         Philip having in
vain attempted its relief with 15000 Men. This unfortunate
King,1347. however, received this one Comfort,
That the Dukedom of Dauphine was annexed to the
Crown of France by a Gift of Hubert the last Duke,Dauphine annexed to France. 
with Condition, that the eldest son of the Kings of
France should bear the Title of Dauphin. This
Hubert having conceived a mortal hatred against
the then Earl of savoy had before put himself under
the Protection of France; but when afterwards by an
unfortunate Accident he killed his only son, he retired
into a Monastery, giving to the King of France
the Possession of his Country. 1349. This King Philip also
bought Roussilion and Montpelier, and was the first
who imposed that so much abominated Tax in France
upon salt,Philip introduced the Gabell. called the Gabell, whereby the subjects are
obliged to pay for the sun and sea Water at so dear a
rate. Wherefore King Edward used to call him in
jest, The Author of the salick Law. He died in the
Year 1356. §. 10. John. His son and successour John was more unfortunate
in his Wars against the English than his Father. Ʋnfortunate in his Wars against the English. 
         
For the Truce being expired, the War began
afresh, wherein Prince Edward made an Inrode with
12000 Men out of Aquitain, destroying all roundabout
him; King John intending to cut off his Retreat,
overtook him with all his Forces near Maupertuis,
two Leagues from Poictiers. 
         Battel near Poictiers. 
          The Prince offered the
King satisfaction for the Damage sustained, which he
refusing to accept of, attacked Prince Edward in his
advantageous Post, he being surrounded with Hedges
and Vineyards; but the English, by the help of their
Bows, soon broke through his Van-guard, and afterwards
the whole Army, which consisted of 50000
Men, put them in Disorder, killing upon the spot
(as it is related by the French Historians) 6000 French,
among whom were 1200 Gentlemen, the King and
his youngest son were both made Prisoners: The three
eldest had the good Fortune to escape. 1356. During the
Father's Imprisonment Charles the Dauphin took

upon him the Administration of Affairs, but the People
which had been sorely oppressed hitherto, being
unwilling to obey it, caused great Disorders in the
Kingdom. The Peasants rise up against the Nobility,
and the Citizens of Paris made heavy Complaints. 
The souldiers for want of Pay lived at Discretion, and
made a miserable havock in the Country; Charles of
Navarre added Fuel to the Fire, in hopes to make his
own Advantage by these Troublesome times, and did
not stick to make Pretensions to the Crown; yet
Matters were composed with him at last. And the
Estates of France refusing to accept of such Conditions
as were proposed by the English, the King of England
entered France with a great Army, and over-run the
greatest part of it, yet could not make himself Master
of any fortified place. Then a Peace was concluded
at Bretigny, a League from Chartres; by vertue of
which the French were to surrender to the English, besides
what they were possessed of before, Poictou, Xaintonge,
Rochelle, Pais d'Aulnis, Angoumois, Perigord,
Limosin, Quercy, Agenois, and Bigorre, with the sovereignty
over them; besides this, Calais, and the
Counties d'Oye, Guisnes and Ponthieu, and three Millions
of Livers, as a Ransom for the King's person. 
This Peace was very hard for France,
         A dishonourable Peace to France. 
          and continued
not long. King John, forced by Necessity, was obliged
to do another thing little becoming his Grandeur, for
he sold his Daughter to Galeas Viscount of Milan,
         1360. 
for 600000 Crowns, giving her in Marriage to the said
Viscount. This King presented his youngest son Philip
sirnamed the Hardy, with the Dukedom of Burgundy,
it being vacant by the Death of the last Duke. 
From this Philip descended the famous Dukes of Burgundy,
whose Territories, at last, devolved to the
House of Austria. This King died in England, whither
he was gone to make satisfaction for his son,
who being a Hostage there had made his escape. 
some say, that he went to see a Lady there, with
whom he was much in love. 1364. 
        §. 11. Charles the Wise, King John was succeeded by his son
Charles V. sirnamed the Wise, who prudently made

amends for the Rashness of his Grandfather and Father,
never engaging himself in Battels with the English,
but by protracting the War and secret Intrigues,
endeavoured to tire out their Courage. The disbanded
souldiers had mutineered, and were become so Insolent,
that no body durst oppose them. These he
sent into spain, where Pieter sirnamed the Cruel and
Henry I. fought for the Crown of Castile. These
Forces had put the Pope in such a fear, that in their
March he presented them with 200000 Livers and a
good store of Indulgences, to divert them thereby
form taking their way near Avignon. Prince Edward
also engaged himself in this War, but got nothing by
it but a sickly Body and great want of Money. Wherefore
he pretend•ng to lay a Tax upon his subjects in
Guienne, to pay off his souldiers, they complained
thereof to the King of France; who having well prepared
himself, and being informed that the Prince languished
under a mortal Disease, summoned him to
appear in Paris, pretending, that the Peace made at
Bretigny was of no force, since the English had not
performed the Conditions, and had since that time
committed Hostilities, wherefore he insisted upon his
former right of sovereignty over Aquitain. And
Prince Edward having sent him a disdainfull Answer,
King Charles denounced War against the English,
         He declares War against the English. 
         
A great many Fast-days and Processions were kept by
the King's Order in France; and the Priests made it
their business to represent the Justice of the King's
Cause, and the Injustice of the English to the People. 
By this way he insinuated himself into the Favour of
the French that lived under the English Jurisdiction, and
persuaded his own subjects to be more free in paying
their Taxes. The Archbishop of Tholouse alone, did,
by his cunning Persuasions, bring over to his Party above
fifty Cities and strong Castles. The Constable
Bertrand du Guesolin did also great mischief to the
English with small Parties, and worsted them not only
in several Rencounters, but also beat them out of
Perigord and Limosin: But in Guienne, especially, the
English Affairs were in a bad condition, after the spanish
Fleet, which was sent to the Assistance of the

         French by Henry King of Castile, had ruined the English
near Rochelle. After which exploit Poictiers was
taken from them, and Rochelle upon very advantageous
Conditions, surrendered it self to the King of France. 
And King Edward being detained by contrary Winds,
not being able to bring over timely Relief, Xaintonge,
Angoumois, and some other places, followed the Example
of the former, The English, not long after,
with an Army of 30000 Men, marched from Calais
cross the Country as far as Guienne, ravaging and plundering
by the way where-ever they came, yet would
Charles never hazard a Battel with them, but contented
himself to annoy them with skirmishes, whereby
he did them considerable Mischief. The Pope, in
the mean while, laboured hard to make Peace betwixt
these two Crowns, but King Edward happening to
die about that time,After the Death of Edward, Charles attacks the English with Advantag•. King Charles took hold of this
Opportunity, and attacking the English with five several
Armies at one time, took all from them but
Calais, Bourdeaux and Bayonne in Guienne, and Cherbury
in Normandy. The English, during the Minority
of their King, being also pestered with the Plague
and the War with the scots, were not in a Capacity
to send sufficient Relief: Yet this King miscarried in
his Enterprize against Britainy. In the Year 1379,
the Emperour Charles IV. came to visit him in Paris,
where he constituted the Dauphin a perpetual Vicar
of the Empire in Dauphine: And ever since, say the
French, the German Emperours never did pretend to
any thing in Dauphine, and in the Kingdom of A•elat. 
He died in the Year 1380. §. 12. Charles VI. Now we are come to that most unfortunate
Reign of Charles VI. at the very beginning of which,
one of the main occasions of Mischief to France was,
That Joan Queen of Naples standing in fear of Charles
de Duraz, did adopt Lewis Duke of Anjou, declaring
him Heir of that Kingdom. The Duke willingly
accepting of her Offer, raised, in her behalf, an Army
of 30000 Horse, having employed thereunto the
Treasure left by Charles V. which he had got clandestinely
into his possession. With this Army be made

himself Master of Provence, which then belonged to
Joan. And tho' in the mean time Charles de Duraz
having killed Joan, had made himself Master of the
Kingdom, the Duke of Anjou, nevertheless, pursued his
intended Expedition; but was, by continual Marches,
and the Cunning of Charles, led about and tired to
that degree, that he died in great Misery, very few of
so great an Army having had the good fortune to return
into France. 
         1384. The People also were generally
much dissatisfied at the beginning, because those who
had the Tuition of the King, to curry-favour with
the People, had promised an abatement of the heavy
Taxes. But the same being not long after again introduced,
augmented and devoured by the Courtiers,
great Troubles and Insurrections arose both in Paris
and other places. In the mean while the Flemings
had carried themselves insolently towards their Lord,
who calling to his Assistance, the French, they killed
40000 Flemings, together with their General Arteville. 
The general Dissatisfaction of the People was
much increased afterward,1382. when a great summ of
Money was employed upon an Expedition against
England, which proving fruitless, both the Money and
Men were lost. The first rise of the French Pretensions upon Milan•
           
          
         Lewis Duke of Orleans, Brother of
this King Charles, married Valentina the Daughter of
John Ga••acius Viscount of Milan, with this Condition,
That he should receive immediately, as a Dowry,
not only a great Treasure of Money and Jewels,
but also the County of Ast; and in case her Father
should die without Issue, the whole Country should
be devolved on Valentina and her Children. Which
Contract has not only furnished France with a Pretension
to Milan, but also has been the occasion of
great Calamities. After this another Misfortune happened
to France, for the King, whose Brains were
mightily weakened by Debaucheries in his younger
Years,〈…〉. as he was travelling in Britainy, fell upon a
sudden Distraction, caused, partly by the great Heat,
which was then in the Month of August; partly, because,
as 'tis reported, a tall black Man appeared to
him, who, stopping his Horse by the Bridle, said,
stop King, whither will you go? you are betraied,
         
soon after a Page being faln asleep, let the point of his
Lance drop upon the Headpiece of him who rid just
before the King, which the King being extreamly surprized
at, interpreted it as directed against him. And
tho' this Madness did cease afterwards, yet was his
Understanding much impaired, and the Fits would
return by intervals. This unhappy Accident was the
occasion of that fatal Contest concerning the Administration
of the Kingdom (which the King was incapable
of) betwixt Lewis Duke of Orleans, the King's
Brother, and Philip Duke of Burgundy, his Uncle. 
The first claimed it on the account of proximity of
Blood, the latter on account of his Age and Experience. 
The latter was most approved of by the Estates,
who declared him Regent; yet the Duke of Orleans,
by making new Intrigues, still endeavoured to make
himself the Head of the Kingdam, which caused pernicious
Factions in the Court. And tho' the Duke of
Burgundy died,1404. his son John pursuing his Father's Pretensions,
the Hatred so increased betwixt both Parties,
that notwithstanding the Reconciliation made betwixt
them,The Duke of Orleans assassinated by the Duke of Eurgundy, 1407. the Duke of Burgundy caused the Duke of Orleans
to be murthered by some Ruffians, at Night, in
the streets of Paris. And tho' the Duke of Burgundy,
after having made away his Rival, and forced a Pardon
from the King, was now the only Man in the
Court, yet were the Animosities betwixt the Duke
of Burgundy, and the sons of the murthered Duke of
Orleans, not extinguished thereby, which divided the
whole Kingdom into two Factions, one siding with
the Burgundian, the other with the Family of Orleans,
and occasioned barbarous Murthers, Devastations, and
such other Calamities, which are the common products
of Civil Commotions. At last the Burgundian
Faction was brought very low by the King and his
Party. The English take advantage of these Troubles. But the English having observed the intestine
Divisions in France, landed in Normandy with a great
Army, and took Harfleur: But being extreamly
weakened both in the siege and by sickness,1415. they resolved
to retreat towards Calais. In the mean while
the French had got together an Army which was four
times stronger than the English, which met them

near Agincourt, a Village in the County of st. Poll,
where a Battel being fought betwixt them,Battel of Agincourt. 
          6000
French were killed upon the spot, and a great number
taken Prisoners, among whom were a great many
persons of Quality. (The English Historians make
this Defeat much greater, it being rarely to be observed,
that the Historians of two Nations, who are at
Enmity, agree in their Relations. ) Yet the English
being extreamly tired, could not pursue the Victory. 
In the mean time the Invasion made by a Foreign
Enemy did in no ways diminish the intestine Divisions,
but rather augmented them: For the Duke of
Burgundy perceiving his Party in France to decline,
began to favour the English, who, in the Year next
following, landed again in Normandy, and had great
success. At last the Queen, who had hitherto had a
share in the Government, added Fuel to the Fire:
For the Constable d' Armagnac having now the sole Administration
of Affairs, and being only balanced by the
Authority of the Queen, took an opportunity, by the
free Conversation of the Queen, to put such a Jealousie
in the King's Head, that with the Consent of Charles
the Dauphin she was banished the Court. Which so
incensed the Queen, that she having conceived an implacable
Hatred against her son, sided with the Duke
of Burgundy, whose Party was thereby greatly
strengthened. Thus commenced the intestine Wars,
wherein both Parties were so exasperated against one
another, that they had little regard to the great success
of the English, who, in the mean time conquered
all Normandy and Roan it self. 1419. The Dauphin intending
at one blow to root out the Evil of these intestine
Commotions, cunningly invited the Duke of Burgundy
to come to an Agreement with him,The Duke of Burgundy assassinated. when at
their second meeting at Monterau, he caused him to
be killed. But this stroke had a quite contrary effect:
For the generality of the Nation abominated the fact,
and the Queen took from hence an Opportunity totally
to ruin her son, and to exclude him from the
succession. Wherefore, entring into a League with
the murthered Duke's son Philip, a Peace was concluded
with Henry V. King of England, by vertue of

which he was to marry Catharine, the Daughter of
Charles VI. and during his Life to be Regent of
France, and after his Death to be put into the full
possession of the Crown of France; That both the
Crowns of France and England should be united, yet
that each Kingdom should be ruled according to its
own Laws. Besides this, a sentence was pronounced
against the Dauphin in Paris, That by reason of the
Murther committed by him upon the Duke of Bargundy,
he was declared incapable of the Crown, and
that he for ever should be banished the Kingdom. He
appealed from this sentence to God and his sword,
and set his Court up at Poictiers, so that at that time
there was in France two Governments and two Courts. 
But the Affairs of the Dauphin were in a very ill condition,
very few of the Provinces siding with him;
those that did, were Anjou, Poictou, Tours, Auvergne,
Berry and Languedock, but all of them mightily exhausted
of Money. But it was happy for him, that
the brave King Henry V. died in the very Flower of
his Age and good Fortune, as likewise did, not long
after,1422. 
         Charles VI. whose Life (by the Infirmities of
his Mind, being incapable of governing the Kingdom)
had greatly obstructed the Welfare of the Kingdom. §. 13. Charles VII. 
         Charles VII. whom we hitherto have called
the Dauphin, caused himself, immediately after his Father's
Death, to be proclaimed King, with the Assistance
of the Bravest among the French, nevertheless
his Affairs at the beginning were under very ill
Circumstances: For the Duke of Bedford, who was
constituted Regent in France, having caused young
Henry VI. of England to be proclaimed King of France
in Paris,
         Henry VI. of England proclaimed King of France. in conjunction with the Dukes of Burgundy
and Britainy, tried all ways to expell him quite out of
France. His Forces were several times miserably
beaten by the English, the greatest part of the Cities
abandoned him, so that the English used to call him,
in derision, the King of Bourges, because he used commonly
to reside there. He was at last become so poor
that he rarely could dine in Publick, and it was observed,

that one time he had nothing for his Dinner
but a piece of roasted Mutton and a couple of Fowls. 
Besides this, most of the great Men about him being
dissatisfied with the ambitious Proceedings of the
Constable Richmond, had left the Court, and were
driving on their own Intrigues. Misunderstandings betwixt the English and the Duke of Burgundy the only Advantage Charles had left. The only Comfort
left to Charles was, that there was a misunderstanding
betwixt the English and the Duke of Burgundy;
else, if they had with their joint Forces vigorously attacked
Charles, he, in all probability could not have
held out long against them. The occasion happened
thus; Jaqueline Countess of Hennegau, Holland, Zealand
and Friesland, being divorced from her Husband,
John Duke of Brabant, a Cousin of the Duke of Burgundy,
was married again to the Duke of Gloucester,
Brother of Henry V. The Duke of Burgundy taking
his Cousin's part, it caused great Heart-burning betwixt
him and the Duke of Gloucester. The Duke
of Bedford endeavoured to appease them, yet did the
Duke of Burgundy from that time entertain a Grudge
against the English; which encreased afterwards, when
the English refused to put the City of Orleans into
the Hands of the Duke of Burgundy. This City being
besieged by the English was reduced to the utmost
Extremity; the French, which attacked a Convoy
which was going to the English Camp, having been
entirely beaten: Which Engagement is called la journée
des Haranes, or, the Battel of the Herrings. 
Charles's Affairs were then become so desperate that
he had resolved to retire into Dauphine, when upon a
sudden an unlooked for help was sent him: For a
Country Maid born in Lorraine,
         The Maid of Orleans. 
          whose Name was
Joan, did pretend that she was sent from God to relieve
Orleans, and to see the King crowned at Rheims. 
Both which she effected, striking thereby great terrour
into the English; whereas, on the other side, the
French being greatly encouraged by this success, saw
their Affairs from henceforward mend every day. But
this poor Wench following the Wars longer, as it
seems, than she had in Commission, was taken Prisoner
making a sally out of Compeigne, and being delivered
to the English,
         1431. was with great dishonour

burnt as a Witch at Roan. 
         The English Power declines in France. 
          The English, perceiving
their Affairs not to go so forward as formerly, resolved
to give them new Life and Vigour, by bringing over
the young King Henry, and having him crowned in
Paris: And to keep fair with the Duke of Burgundy
they gave him the Counties of Brie and Champaigne;
yet all this proved insufficient. The War therefore
having been thus carried on for several Years only
with light skirmishes, both Parties being tired out, a
Treaty was at last proposed by Mediation of the Pope
at Arras; but the English rigorously insisting upon
their Pretensions, which were very hard, they were
deserted by the Duke of Burgundy, who made a separate
Peace with Charles upon very advantageous Conditions. 
There befell also the English another Misfortune
by the Death of the Duke of Bedford,
         1435. who hitherto
had administred the Affairs in France with
great Prudence. After this the Cities of France surrendered
themselves one after another to Charles;
among which was Paris, which submitted it self to
its natural Lord. 1436. But because the English had made
miserable havock throughout France, and the French
souldiers themselves being ill paid, had committed
great Depredations, without any Order or Discipline,
a great Famine ensued, and afterwards a great Plague. 
It is related that the Wolves did snatch the Children
out of the streets of the suburbs of st. Anthony in
Paris. The War having been thus protracted for a
considerable time, a Truce was concluded for some
Years. The King, to be rid of the souldiers, sent
them into Alsace, under pretence to disturb the Council
at Basil. They killed at once 4000 swiss, but
having lost double the number soon after, returned
home again. In the mean time the English were degenerated
from their former Valour, their Forces
were extreamly diminished in France, and the souldiers
for want of Pay had given themselves over to
Plunder. They wanted good Officers, their Places
were not well provided, and their subjects weary of
the Government. England, at home, was divided
within it self, and the English weakened by two Overthrows,
which they had received from the scots. 

Charles therefore having met with this Opportunity,
resolved to beat the English at once out of France. 
He took, for a Pretence of the War, that they had
broken the Truce in Britainy and with the scots; and
attacking them with great Vigour in several places at
once,He drives the English out of France, 1449. he drove them, within the space of thirteen
Months, out of Normandy. The next Year after he
took from them Aquitain, Bayonne being the last
which surrendered it self;1451. so that the English had nothing
left on the Continent of France but Calais and
the County of Guines: Bourdeaux soon after revolted
from the French, and sought for Aid of the
English, but the brave Talbot having been killed in an
Engagement, it was retaken and re-united to the
French Crown,1453. after it had been 300 Years in the possession
of the English. Thus did this King re-unite the
mangled Kingdom, having expelled the English out
of its Bowels. Nevertheless he did not entirely enjoy
the Fruits of his good Fortune, living at variance
with his son, who for the space of thirteen Years came
not to Court. And being at last persuaded, that a
Design was formed against his Life, it so disturbed
him,1461. that for fear of being poisoned, he starved himself. §. 14. Him succeeded his son Lewis XI. a cunning,Lewis XI. 
resolute and malicious Prince, who laid the first Foundation
of the absolute Power since exercised by the
Kings of France, whereas formerly the Royal Power
was kept under by the Authority of the great Men of
the Kingdom. He reduces the excessive power of the Nobility. He began with reforming his Court
and Ministers according to his Pleasure: Of which the
great Men of the kingdom foreseeing the Consequence,
they entered into a League,A League against him. which they called, La
Ligue du bien public, the League for the publick good;
wherewith they pretended to defend the Publick against
the King's arbitrary Proceedings. Among these
were the Dukes of Burgundy and Britainy, who were
willing to keep the King within bounds. In the Year
1465, Charles, the young Duke of Burgundy, entered
France with an Army, and fought a Battel with the
King near Montlehery, wherein the Advantage was

near equal; but, because the King retreated a little
backwards the Night following, the Duke of Burgundy
pretended to have gained the Victory, which put
him upon those Enterprizes which afterwards cost him
his Life. The King's 〈◊〉 
           ••
           thods. The King extricated himself with a great
deal of Cunning out of this danger, for he released the
Taxes, and with great Promises and fine Words appeased
the People, all which, as soon as the danger
was passed, he revoked at pleasure. To dissolve the
knot of this Faction, he made Divisions betwixt the
most powerfull, the bravest he brought over to his
side by giving them particular Advantages, the rest he
ruined by his Policy, especially by bribing their Friends
and servants. And being in great want of Money,
he borrowed great summs of his servants, and such as
refused to lend, were put out of their Employments:
Which,The Original of selling the Offices of France. 
          'tis said, gave the first occasion, that the Offices
were afterwards sold in France. But the Duke
of Burgundy persisted in his Opposition, who had in
the Year 1468 hemed him in at Peronne, which danger
he however escaped. Duke of Burgundy slain. At last Lewis was rid of this his
troublesome Enemy, who had laid so many Designs
against him,1477. he being killed by the swiss near Nancy. 
Lewis taking advantage of the great Confusion, which
was occasioned by the Death of the Duke in that
Country, took possession of the Dukedom of Burgundy,
under pretext that the same was an Appanage, and
brought over to his side the Cities situated on the River
some, which had been under the Jurisdiction of
Charles. It was generally believed, That Lewis, by
way of Marriage, might easily have annexed the whole
Inheritance of this Duke unto France, if he had not
conceived such an implacable hatred against this House,
that he was resolved to ruin it. Two Years before the
Death of the Duke of Burgundy King Edward IV. 
landed with a great Army in France, whom Lewis
with Presents and fair Promises persuaded to return
home again. He united to the Crown Provence, Anjou
and Muns, having obtained the same by the last
Will and Testament of Charles d' Anjou, Count de
Maine, who was the last Male Heir of the House of
Anjou; notwithstanding that Rene Duke of Lorraine,
         
son of Ygland d' Anjou pretended a Right to the same
by his Mother's side. In his latter days he lived miserably,
and grew ridiculous, being in continual fear of
death. He died in the Year 1483. §. 15. Charles VIII. His son Charles VIII. had at the beginning
of his Reign his Hands full with the Duke of
Britainy, and was marching with an Army to unite
that Province by main force to the Crown. But understanding
that Maximilian of Austria had concluded
a Match betwixt Anna, the only Heiress of this
Dukedom and himself, the French King did think it
no ways adviseable to let such a delicious Morsel fall
to the share of the House of Austria, but obliged the
Bride, partly by force, partly by fair words, to renounce
Maximilian, and to be married to himself,
whereby this Country was united to France. And
tho' Henry VII. Britainy united to France, King of England, did not look with a
good Eye upon the growing Power of France,
         1491. and
therefore with a great Army besieged Boulogne, yet in
consideration of a good summ of Money he was prevailed
upon to return home again; especially, since
Maximilian (who had received a double affront from
Charles, who had not only taken his Bride from him,
but also had sent back his Daughter Margaret, which
was promised to him in Marriage) did not join his
Forces with him according to Agreement. Maximilian
took Arras and st. Omer, but being not able to
go further he consented, that his son Philip, Lord of
the Netherlands, might make a Truce with Charles. 
On the other side, Charles gave to Ferdinand the Catholick,
the Counties of Russilion and Cerdagne, some
say, to engage him thereby not to oppose his intended
Expedition against Naples. Others say, that Ferdinand
corrupted Charles's Confessour, to persuade him,
that he should restore that Country to its lawfull sovereign. 
France being thus by the Union with Britainy
become an entire Kingdom, it began to contrive
how to obtain the sovereignty over Italy. Charles
had a Pretension,An Expedition to Naples, end the Pre
           •••sions of it. because the Right and Title of the
Family of Anjo and Naples was by the Death of the
last Duke of Anjou and Earl of Provence devolved to

         Lewis XI. and consequently to himself. But this
young King received the greatest Encouragement from
Lewis sirnamed Morus, or the Black, Duke of Milan,
who, having Tuition of his Nephew John Galeas,
the true Heir of this Dukedom, but a weak Prince,
had under that Pretence made himself Master of the
same. This Duke fearing that he might be put out
of possession by Ferdinand King of Naples, whose
son Alfonsus's Daughter Isabella was married to John
Galeas, endeavoured to give Ferdinand his Hands full
of Work, that he might not be at leisure to think of
him; knowing also, that Ferdinand and his son Alfonsus
were much hated by their subjects for their Tyranny
and Impiety. An Expedition was therefore
undertaken against Naples,
         1494. which proved the occasion
of continual Miseries to Italy for the space of forty
Years; for so long it was the Cock-pit for the French,
Germans and spaniards, and at last lost a great part
of its ancient Liberty. Charles conquered Naples. It seemed to be fatal to Italy,
that the wise Italians either could or would not prevent
this Expedition, which was designed two Years
before. Charles had at the beginning all the success
imaginable, for the Italian Troops were in a very ill
condition, and there being no body who durst oppose
him, Florence and the Pope sided with him, the latter
declaring Charles King of Naples. King Alfonsus
stirred up by his own Conscience, abdicated himself,
transferring all his Right and Title upon his son Ferdinand:
But his Forces being soon beaten and dispersed,
Charles made his solemn Entry into Naples
with loud Acclamations. 1495. Immediately the whole
Kingdom submitted to him, except the Isle of Iseria,
and the Cities of Brundisi and Gallipoli. The Conquest
of so fair a Kingdom, and that within five
Months time, struck a Terrour into the Turkish Emperour
himself, being in fear at constantinople, and
Greece being ready to rebell as soon as the French
should land on that side. But the Face of Affairs
was quickly changed; for the French, by their ill behaviour
quickly lost the Favour of the Neapolitans;
the King minded nothing but Gaming, and the rest
following his Example, were careless in maintaining

their Conquest. Besides this, it was looked upon as
a thing of such Consequence by the rest of the Princes
of Europe,
         The League of Italy against the French. 
          that the Emperour, the Pope, King Ferdinand
of Arragon, Venice and Milan entered into a
Confederacy, to drive the French out of Italy;
Charles therefore fearing lest his Retreat might be cut
off, took his Way by Land into France, having left
things but in an indifferent state of Defence in Naples. 
In his March he was met by the Confederate Army
near the River of Taro, where a Battel was fought, in
which, tho' there were more killed on the Confederate
side than of the French,
         He los•th Naples. 
          yet he marched forward
with such Precipitation, as if he had lost the Battel. 
Charles was no sooner returned into France, but Ferdinand
soon retook, without great trouble, the Kingdom
of Naples, to the great Dishonour of the French,
who were not able to maintain themselves there a
whole Year, of whom very few returned alive into
France. Not long after Charles died without
Issue. 1498. 
        §. 16. Lewis XII. Him succeeded Lewis XII. formerly Duke
of Orleans, who, not to lose Britainy, married Anna
Widow of the late King. He made War soon after
on Milan, pretending a Right to that Dukedom by his
Grandmother's side, and having conquered the same
within 21 days. 1499. 
         Lewis the Black was forced to fly
with his Children and all his Treasure into Germany. 
         He conq•ers Milan. 
         
But the Inhabitants of Milan grew quickly weary of
the French, their free Conversation with the Women
being especially intolerable to them, and therefore recalled
their Duke, who having got together an Army
of swiss was joyfully received, and regained the whole
Country, except the Castle of Milan and the City of
Novara. But Lewis sending timely Relief, the
Duke's swiss souldiers refused to fight against the
French, so that the Duke endeavouring to save himself
by flight in a common souldiers Habit, was taken
Prisoner, and kept ten Years in Prison at Loches, where
he died. Thus the French got Milan and the City of
Genoua again. After so great success Lewis began to
think of the Kingdom of Naples: To obtain which,

he made a League with Ferdinand the Catholick,
         He conquers Naples. 
         
wherein it was agreed, that they should divide the
Kingdom betwixt them, so that the French should
have for their share Naples, Terre de Labour and Abruzze;
and the spaniards, Poville and Calabria. 
Each of them got his share without any great trouble,
Frederick King of Naples surrendring himself to King
Lewis,
         1501. who allowed him a yearly Pension of 30000
Crowns. But soon after new Differences arose betwixt
these two haughty Nations, concerning the
Limits; for the French pretended that the Country of
Capitanate (which is very considerable for its Taxes
paid for sheep, which are there in great numbers) did
belong to Abruzze, whereas the spaniards would
have it belong to Poville; and from Words they came
to Blows. The French, at first, had somewhat the
better; but as soon as Gonsalvus de Cordoua, that cunning
spaniard had broke their first Fury, and Lewis
did not send sufficient Relief,Loses it agai•. they were as shamefully
beaten again out of the Kingdom, as they had
been before. Lewis endeavoured to revenge himself
upon the spaniards in the Year next following,1503. but
tho' he attacked them with four several Armies, yet
could he not gain any thing upon them: Wherefore
he made a Peace with Ferdinand, and entered into an
Alliance with him against Philip son-in-law to Ferdinand,
who having, after the death of Isabella, taken
from him the Kingdom of Castile, was upheld by
his Father Maximilian, and backed by Henry King of
England, whose son had married his Wife's sister. In
the Year 1507, the City of Genoua rebelled against
Lewis, but was soon reduced to her former Obedience. 
Then the War began afresh in Italy,
         The Venetian War. with the
Venetians, who being too much addicted to self-interest,
had drawn upon themselves the hatred of all
their Neighbours, having encroached upon every one
of them; and Lewis especially attributed to them his
loss of the Kingdom of Naples. To humble this
proud state a League was concluded at Cambray,
         Lewis joins in the League against th••. betwixt
the Emperour, the Pope, the Kings of France
and spain. 
         1508. 
         Lewis, by entring into a Confederacy
with his mortal Enemies, had more regard to his

Passion than his Interest, it being certain that he
might upon all occasions have trusted to the Friendship
of the Venetians. But now he was the first that
fell upon them,1509. and defeated them in a great Battel
near Giera d' Addua, which caused such a Terror among
them, that they left all what they had on the
Continent, within twenty days, and if Lewis had pursued
his Victory whilst they were under this first Consternation,
he might doubtless have put a period to
their Greatness. But in the mean time that he marched
back towards Milan, not making the best of his
Victory, they got leisure to recover themselves; especially
since the Emperour Maximilian was not in
earnest against them, and Pope Julius II. was reconciled
to them. A League against Lewis. 
          Nay, in the Year 1510, the Pope,
Ferdinand, Henry VIII. and the swiss Cantons, denounced
War against Lewis. For the Pope could not
look with a good Eye upon the growing Power of
France in Italy, Ferdinand feared lest Lewis might
attack Naples, and Henry being come lately to the
Crown, was for making himself famous by so great
an Undertaking; the swiss were set against France,
because Lewis had not paid them their old Arrears,
and had refused to encrease their Pension, not because
their Demands were extravagant, but because he
would not be out-braved by them. In this War the
French General Gasto de Foix behaved himself very
gallantly; for he relieved Bononia, beat the Venetian
Army, killed 8000 of them in Brescia, and obtained
a glorious Victory against the Confederate Army near
Ravenna;
         1512. in which Battel, nevertheless, this brave
General, being too hot in pursuing the Enemy, was
slain. With his death the French Affairs began to decline,
and they were again forced to leave Italy. 
Maximilian, son of Lewis the Black was restored to
his Dutchy of Milan by the help of the swiss: The
Genoucse revolted, and made sanus Fregosus their
Duke. Ferdinand the Catholick took from King John
the Kingdom of Navarre, which the French in vain
endeavoured to regain from the spaniards. But Lewis
being extreamly desirous to regain Milan entered
into a League with Venice,
         He conquers Milan agai•n. and retook most places of

that Dukedom and the City of Genoua. He besieged
Duke Maximilian in the Castle of Novara, but the
swiss coming to the Assistance of the Duke, attacked
the French with incredible Fury in their Camp, and
drove them quite out of the whole Dukedom, which
was twice taken in one Month. He is attacked by several Princes at once. Then Lewis was at
one time attacked by the Emperour, England, and
the swiss; and if the English and the swiss had joined,
France would have run a great Risque: But King
Henry, in lieu of entring into the Heart of France, lost
his Time at the siege of Terou•ne, where he defeated
the French, that were come to its Relief, near Guinegast;
this Battel was called La journée des esperons,
or The Battel of the spurs, because the French made
better use of their spurs than their swords; and after
he had taken Tournay, he returned into England. The
swiss, who kept the Duke of Tremoville besieged,
were bought off with 600000 Crowns, which were
promised to them by the Duke without the King's
Order, as likewise, that he should renounce the Council
of Pisa and his Pretensions to the Dukedom of Milan. 
Which shamefull Agreement the King refused
to ratify; and if the swiss had not been more fond of
the Ransom offered for the Hostages than their Blood,
they had paied with their Lives for it. In the Year
next following Lewis made a Peace with the King of
England, who gave him his sister Mary in Marriage;
which young Lady, 'tis thought, did hasten the Death
of the old King, which ensued in the beginning of the
Year 1515. This King was so well beloved by his
People, that he was generally called, Le Pere du
Peuple, or The Father of the People. 
        §. 17. His Nephew Francis I. succeeded him,Francis 1. who
having made a League with England, the Archduke
Charles and Venice, entered upon a sudden into Italy,
and took Genoua and some other Places without great
Opposition; but being encamped near Marignano,
within a League of Milan, the swiss unexpectedly
fell upon him, where a bloody Fight ensued. The
swiss were at last repulsed, and found that they could
be beaten, having lost above 10000; but the French
         
also left 4000 of their best Men upon the spot. After
this Maximilian surrendered himself and the whole
Country to the King, on the Condition of an annual
Pension of 30000 Ducats to be paid him. soon after
the King agreed with the swiss, whom in Consideration
of a good summ, he brought again into an Alliance
with France. He made also an Agreement with Pope
Leo X. by vertue of which the King was to have the
Right of naming Bishops and Abbots, but the Pope to
keep certain Benefits out of the chiefest Church Benefices. 
In the Year 1518, he redeemed Tournay form
the English for a good summ of Money. He aspires to the Empire. In the Year
next following, after the Death of the Emperor
Maximilian, Francis emploied all his Engines to be
exalted to the Imperial Dignity; but the German
Princes fearing lest the French should endeavour to
humble them, and for some other Considerations, preferred
before him Charles V. This proved the Occasision
of great Jealousies betwixt these two Princes; for
Francis being very sensible what great Advantages he
had gained by the Imperial Dignity, put himself into
a good posture, to prevent his becoming Master of
him and all the rest of the Princes in Europe. This Jealousie
broke at last out into an open War,In a few Days he takes and loses the Kingdom of Navarre. 
          
         Francis endeavouring
to re-take Navarre from the spaniards, as
thinking to have met with a fair Opportunity, whilst
the Divisions in spain were on Foot. The French conquered
that Kingdom in a few days time, but being not
carefull enough to preserve it, as easily lost it again. 
soon after the War was kindled in the Netherlands,
         1521. 
occasioned by Robert Van de Marck, Lord of sedan,
whom Francis took into his Protection. This Robert
was so puft up with the French Protection, that he
writ a Letter of Defiance to the Emperour, and fell
into the Country of Luxemburgh. But Charles quickly
chastised this petty Enemy; and being persuaded
that Francis had encouraged him thereunto, he took
from him st. Amand and Tournay, The Business nevertheless
might have been composed at the beginning,
if the French had not insisted upon keeping Fonterabia,
which in the mean time had been surprised by
them. A War 〈◊〉 in Italy. 
          But the hardest task was in Italy, both the

Emperour and Pope being willing to drive Francis
out of Milan, and to restore Francis sforza. 
They effected both with good success, for the French
Army was not timely supplied with Money, and being,
besides this, beaten near Bicoque, the French
were again driven out of Milan and Genoua. 
         The French driven out of Milan, 1521. And
on the other side they also lost Fonterabia. But what
happened very ill to Francis, was, That the Constable
Charles of Bourbon went over to the Emperour;The Duke of Bourbon revolts to the Emperour. the
Reason of which was, That he had been for a while
mightily kept under by the Queen Mother, the Chancellour
Duprat, and Admiral Bonnivet. The first
had commenced a suit at Law against him about the
Dukedom of Bourbon, which he despaired to be able
to maintain against so strong a Party, as believing
that the King was underhand concerned in the Matter. 
'Tis said, that the first Cause of this Difference
was, because the Duke of Bourbon had refused to marry
her. The Duke of Bourbon therefore had agreed
with the Emperor and the King of England, That
they should divide the Kingdom of France betwixt
them; the Kingdom of Arelat and the Emperour's
sister having been promised to the Duke of Bourbon. 
But the Design being discovered the Duke of Bourbon
was forced to fly into Italy. 
         1524. Notwithstanding the
English had made an Inrode into Picardy, Francis sent
again an Army into the Milaneze, under the Command
of the Admiral Bonnivet, which was beaten
back with considerable loss by the Duke of Bourbon. 
This Bonnivet persuaded the King to go in Person into
Italy, with this prospect, that if Things succeeded
well, he should have the Glory of having been the
Adviser, but if they succeeded ill, the Misfortune would
be covered by the King's Person. Francis therefore
went with a good Resolution into Italy, because he
saw the Duke of Bourbon, who in the mean time having
entered Provence, had besieged Marseilles, did retreat
before him, and having laid siege to Pavia, he
for two Months together harrassed his Army in that
siege. In the mean while the Imperialists drew their
Forces together, and marched against him (who was
encamped in the Parks) with an Intention either to

sight him,Franc's desired at the Battel of Pavia, and taken Prisoner, or to relieve Pavia. Francis engaged with
them in a Battel, but was defeated and taken Prisoner. 
And thus the French were again driven out of Italy. 
Francis was carried into spain, and kept very
hardly,1525. so that he fell sick for Grief; which hastened
his Liberty, it being feared that he might die through
Vexation. Besides that, England and the Italian
Princes entered into a Confederacy to hinder the growing
Power of Charles. The Conditions upon which
he obtained his Liberty we have touched upon in another
place; but besides this, Francis gave his Parole
of Honour, if the said Conditions were not fulfilled,
That he would return a Prisoner. He is set at Liberty on hard Conditions, which he did not perform. But the wiser sort
did sufficiently foresee, that Francis would not perform
the Agreement, wherefore Gattinata the Chancellour
refused to sign the Treaty, alledging, That
Charles could get nothing else by this Treaty but the
implacable Hatred of the French, and to be ridiculed
by every Body; that he had been bubbled and disappointed
in his covetous Designs. And Francis having
obtained his Liberty after thirteen Months Imprisonment,
pretended, That what had been done was done
in Prison, and contrary to his Coronation Oath which
he had taken at Rheims; That the Kingdom was not
in his disposal, he having only the use of the same for
Life. The same was alledged by the Estates, and
especially, by the Burgundians, who would in no ways
consent to be separated from the Crown of France. If
Charles was so much for having Burgundy, he ought
to have taken care to have been put into possession of
the same, before he set Francis at liberty. As soon
as Francis had got his Liberty, he made it his first
Business to renew the League with England and the
Italian states. He with the King of England declare War against the Emperour. And the new Treaty having proved
fruitless which was set on foot with the Emperour,
both Kings denounced War against him. Charles afterwards
accusing Francis of not having kept his Parole,
the latter gave the first the Lye, sending him
also a Challenge, which Matters were looked upon by
the World as very unbecomming the Grandeur of such
Princes. He sends an 〈◊〉 my into Italy. 
         Francis sent, after this, an Army into Italy
under the Command of Odet de Foix Lautree, which

having made considerable progresses in the Milaneze,
entered the Kingdom of Naples, and having taken
a great many places there, laid siege before the Capital
City it self. But the French Affairs received the
first shock there, when Andrew Doria, the Admiral,
leaving the French side, went over to the Emperour,
he being dissatisfied that the King had refused to conferr
upon him the Government of his Native City
Genoua, and to restore to the Genouese, savona. This
Doria is deservedly praised, for that, when he might
have been Lord of his Native Country, he chose rather
to procure its Liberty, which it enjoys to this
Day. But Doria leaving the French side, was the occasion
that the City of Naples could not be cut off of
their Communication by sea. And the Plague began
to reign in the Army during this long siege, which
devoured the greatest part of it, and the General himself. 
The Remnants of the Army were miserably
treated, the Officers being made Prisoners, and the
common souldiers disarmed; the French were also
obliged to quit Milan and Genoua. At last, the Emperour
having obtained his Aim, and Francis being very
desirous to see his Children at Liberty again,Peace made at Cambray. 
          a Peace was
concluded betwixt them at Cambray, by vertue of
which,1529. 
         Francis paied two Millions of Ducats as a
Ransom for his sons, and renounced the sovereignty
over Flanders, Artois, Milan and Naples. And this
was all the Benefit which this King and his Predecessours
had reapt from the Italian Wars. 1535. Nevertheless,
some Years after,The War breaks out afresh. the War began afresh, at which time
Francis found a new way to make himself Master of
the Milaneze, by first securing to himself the Dukedom
of savoy. Wherefore he made Pretensions upon
Charles Duke of savoy concerning the Inheritance of
his Mother, descended out of the House of savoy, and
for some other Reasons he fell upon him, and took most
of his strong Holds. In the mean time died Francis
sforza Duke of Milan, wherefore the Emperour was
resolved to annex this Country to his House, but Francis
could by no means digest the loss of it. Charles
therefore entered Provence in person with an Army of
40000 Foot and 16000 Horse, ransacked Aix and besieged

         Marseilles, which however he could not take,
his Army being in a Month's time greatly diminished
by sickness. An Army of 30000 Men also entered Picardy
from the Netherlands, which took Guise, but
was beaten from before Peronne; yet afterwards took
st. Pol and Monstrevil. Francis summoned the Emperour
before him as his Vassal concerning Flanders
and Artois, alledging, that the sovereignty of these
Provinces was inseparable from the Crown, and made
an Alliance with the Turks. The first seemed to be
very ridiculous to most People, the last very unbecoming
a Christian Prince. The French however reply,
That this Alliance was eagerly sought for by the
Emperour himself. At last, by the Mediation of the
Pope,The Truce prolonged for nine Years. the Truce which was the Year before made at
Nissa in Provence was prolonged for nine Years, and
these two great Rivals gave afterwards one another a
Visit at Aigues Mortes. And when in the Year next
following the City of Ghent rebelled, Charles had such
a Confidence in Francis, that he took his Journey
through France, tho' Charles in the mean while had
cunningly given Francis some Hopes of the Recovery
of Milan; which however afterwards he would not
acknowledge, because upon the Persuasions of the Constable
Montmorency, the King had not taken from
him any security under his Hand during his stay in
Paris; which some alledge to be one reason why
Montmorency afterwards fell into Disgrace. But the
Truce was broke again,Francis breaks the Truce, under pretence, That the Governour
of Milan had caused to be killed Caesar Fregosus
and Anthony Rinco the Ambassadours of Francis,
         1542. 
as they were going along the River Po in their Way to
Venice, the first of whom was to have gone from
thence to Constantinople, Francis thought to have
met now with a fair Opportunity, because Charles had
suffered a considerable loss before Algier. He therefore
attacked the Emperour with five several Armies at
once. But the strongest of all, which lay before Perpignan
did nothing, the second took some Places in the
Country of Luxemburgh. The Emperour solyman also
made a great Diversion in Hungary, taking Gran
and some other Places. The great Pyrate Barbarossa
         
arrived in Prevence with his Fleet, but did more mischief
than good to France, But Charles, on the other
hand, made an Alliance with Henry VIII. who was
dissatisfied with Francis, because he had taken part
with the scots, and would not renounce his Obedience
to the Pope. He, after he had beat the Duke of
Cleves, who depended on the French, besieged Landrecy
with a great Army, but to no purpose. In the
mean time the French had obtained a most signal Victory
over the Imperial Forces near Cerisolles in Piedmont. 
But the King could not prosecute his Victory,
being obliged to recall his Troops, because the Emperour
and Henry King of England had made an Agreement
with an Army of 80000 Foot and 22000
Horse, to fall into France; the first by the Way of
Champagne, the second by the Way of Picardy, to
join their Forces near Paris, to ransack the City and
all the adjacent Countries as far as to the River Loire. 
The Emperour took by the Way Luxemburgh, lay six
Weeks before Disier, got abundance of Provision in
Espernay and Chasteau Thierry, which put the whole
City of Paris into a great Consternation; and no small
Danger seemed to threaten that City, if King Henry
had joined his Forces in time, according to his Promise:
But he losing his Time in the sieges of Boulogne
and Monstrevil,
         A Peace concluded at Crespy, 1544. 
         Charles hearkened to a Peace, which
was concluded at Crespy. By vertue of this Peace all
the Places were restored, and the Emperour promised
to the Duke of Orleans, the second son of the King,
either his or his Brother's Daughter in Marriage, and
to give for her Dowry either Milan or the Netherlands;
which was not performed, because the said
Duke died in the Year next following. 1546. 
         Francis also
made a Peace with England, under Condition that he
should have liberty to redeem Boulogne for a certain
summ of Money. He died in the Year 1547. §. 18. Henry II. Him succeeded his son Henry II. to whom
fell the Marquisate of saluzze,
         1548. as a Fief of Dauphine,
the last Marquiss Gabriel dying without Issue. 1549. He severely
chastized the City of Bourdeaux, which had rebelled
against him. 1550. In the Year next following he

redeemed Boulogne for a certain summ of Money from
the English. In the Year 1551, the Emperour being
engaged in a War against the Turks, and the German
Princes being very jealous of his Greatness, Henry
thought to have met with a fit Opportunity to break
with him. He began therefore in the Netherlands
and Piedmont; and having made an Alliance with
Maurice Elector of saxony,
         His Expedition into Germany, 1552. he marched with his Army
towards the Rhine, and surprized by the Way the
Cities of Metz, Toul and Verdun, and would have
done the same with strasbourgh, if they had not been
upon their Guard there. But the Elector of saxony
having made a Peace with the Emperour without including
the King, and some Princes intreating him
not to advance farther into the Empire he marched
back into the Country of Luxembourgh, where he took
some Places. The Emperour then besieged Metz with
an Army of 100000 Men, but the Duke of Guise defended
himself so bravely, that the Emperour was
obliged to raise the siege with great loss. To revenge
this Affront, he attacked Terouëne in Artois with great
Fury, and rased to the Ground this Fortress, which
had proved hitherto so troublesome to the Netherlands. 
The same he did to Hesdin, both the Garrisons
being put to the sword. On the other side the French
took siena in Italy, and several Places in the Island of
Corsica,
         1555. but were again beaten out of siena, after they
had been mauled near Marciano. 
         A Truce between Charles V. and Henry II. 
          In the Year 1556,
a Truce was concluded at Vaucelles near Cambray, the
Emperour being desirous to leave the Kingdom to his
son (to whom he had surrendered the same) in Peace. 
But the Truce was scarce confirmed by Oath, when
the French, upon the Instigation of Pope Paul IV. 
broke the same again, who having some Differences
with spain persuaded Henry to take his part. The
Duke of Guise was therefore sent into Italy with an
Army, but did nothing worth mentioning. In the
mean time King Philip had gathered an Army of 50000
Men, hoping thereby to establish his Reputation in
the beginning of his Reign, and having also drawn
England into the War, he besieged st. Quintin, into
which place the Admiral Gaspar Coligny had thrown

himself. The Constable Montmorency advanced with
an Army to the Relief of the Place, but retreating again
in sight of the Enemies, they fell upon him, and
gave him a terrible Defeat. 1557. 
         France had been then in
the utmost danger, if this Victorious Army had
marched directly towards Paris, and if the Enemies
Design upon Lyons had not miscarried. But King Philip
feared least the Duke of savoy, who commanded his
Army, might take this Opportunity to reconcile himself
to France upon some advantageous Conditions;
wherefore he would not let him march on far into the
Country, but took st. Quintin by storm, and lost his
Time in the taking of Han, Chastelet and Noyon. This
gave leisure to the French to recollect themselves, and
having recalled the Duke of Guise out of Italy, they
retook Calais, and those few other places which remained
under the English thereabouts, as likewise
Thionville in the Year 1559. A Project to unite scotland with France misscarried. In the same Year a Project
was set on foot, to unite the Kingdom of scotland
with France, by a Marriage betwixt Queen Mary and
the Dauphine Francis; but the same miscarried, no
Children being born of them. The Mareschal de
Fermes, who made an Inrode into Flanders was soundly
beaten near Gravelingen. At last a Peace was concluded
at Chasteau en Cambresis, which proved very
pernicious for France; because, for the Castle of Cambray,
the Cities of Han, Chastelet and st. Quintin, there
were not only 198 Places redelivered to spain, and
the Duke of savoy restored, but also this Peace was
partly the Occasion of those intestine Wars, which afterwards
miserably tore in pieces the Kingdom of
France. It was also resolved in France not to intermeddle
any more in the Italian Affairs, and to dissolve
the Alliance with the Turks. After this Peace was
concluded Henry was killed in a Turnament, a splinter
of a broken Lance having got into his Eye; for
the King had challenged the Earl of Montgomery to
run against him with an open Vizier, and as soon
as he was wounded he lost both his senses and
speech, and died within eleven days. By this Accident,
the Wedding which he celebrated for his
sister Margaret, which was married to Chilibert Emanuel
         
Duke of savoy, was very mournfully consummated. §. 19. Francis II. Him succeeded his son Francis II. under
whose Reign the French Divisions began to break out
with Fury in their own Bowels, which continued near
40 Years, whereas formerly the violent Heat of this
Nation had been quelled, partly by the Wars with the
English, partly by the several Expeditions undertaken
against Italy. 
         The Causes of the intestine Wars of France. 
          Concerning the Causes of these
Intestine Wars, it is to be observed, That after the
House of Valois came to the Crown, the next in
Blood were those of the House of Bourbon, which
House was grown so Potent, by its Riches, Power
and Authority of a great many brave Persons, which
descended from it, that the preceding Kings were
grown extreamly jealous of it. And, tho' Francis I. 
at the beginning of his Reign did constitute the Duke
of Bourbon Constable; yet being soon convinced afterwards,
of the Reasons which had induced his Ancestors
to keep under this House, he used all his Endeavours
to humble the said Charles of Bourbon. For
this Reason he entered into a Conspiracy against Francis,
which having been discovered, he went over to
Charles V. and commanded as General in the Battel
near Pavia, where Francis was taken Prisoner, and
was slain in the storming of Rome. 
         1527. By his Death the
House of Bourbon received a great blow, those who
were left being looked upon with a very ill Eye, tho'
they kept themselves very quiet to extinguish the suspicion
and Hatred conceived against them. The House
of Bourbon being thus brought very low, the two
Houses of Montmorency and Guise held up their Heads
under the Reign of Francis I. The first was one of
the most ancient in France; the latter was a Branch
of the House of Lorrain. The Head of the first was
Annas Montmorency, Constable of France; of the latter
Claude Duke of Guise. Both of them were in
great Favour and Authority with Francis I. but both
fell into Disgrace at the latter end of his Reign, being
banished the Court. It is related of Francis I. that
just before his Death he advised his son Henry to consult

with neither of them in his Affairs, since too great
and too able Ministers proved often dangerous. Yet
notwithstanding this, Henry II. did receive both Annas
Montmorency and Francis de Guise, the son of
Claude, into his particular Favour; who quickly grew
jealous of one another, the first taking much upon
him because of his Experience in state Affairs, and
Gravity, the latter being puffed up with the Glory of
Martial Exploits,The House of Guise rises, and that of Bourbon declines. and the Applause of the People; the
Authority of the Duke of Guise was greatly encreased
after he had repulsed Charles V. from before Metz,
and taken Calais; whereas the unfortunate Battel
fought near st. Quintin, and the ensuing dishonourable
Peace were very prejudicial to Montmorency,
But the House of Guise got the greatest Advantage,
after Francis II. had married Mary Queen of scotland,
whose Mother was sister to the Duke of Guise: so
that during the Reign of Francis II. the Duke of
Guise and the Cardinal his Brother, were the Men
that bore the greatest sway in the Kingdom; which
extreamly exasperated Montmorency and the two Brothers
of Bourbon, Anthony King of Navarre, and the
Prince of Conde, seeing themselves thus neglected. 
And tho' Anthony was of a very modest Behaviour,
watching only an Opportunity to regain his Kingdom
of Navarre from the spaniards, and having a sufficient
Revenue out of his Country of Bearn, wherewithal to
maintain himself; yet the Prince of Conde was Ambitious,
Poor, and of a turbulent spirit, who was not able
to maintain his Grandeur without some considerable
Employment. Besides this, he was continually stirred up
by the Admiral Gaspar Coligny, an ambitious, cunning
and fly Man; who, as his Enemies will have it, was very
forward to fish in troubled Waters; his Brother d' Andelot
also being of a very wild and turbulent spirit. 
These three only watched an Opportunity to raise
Commotions in the Kingdom. Thus the great Men
of the Kingdom were divided into these several Factions,
at the Time when Francis II. began his Reign, a
Prince scarce sixteen Years old, weak both in Body
and Mind, and therefore incapable to rule the Kingdom
by himself. several therefore pretended to have

a right to the Administration of the Government,Divisions about the Administration of the Government. 
these of Bourbon, as being the next Princes of the
Blood; the House of Guise, as being nearly related to
the Queen, and the Queen Mother Catharine de Medicis,
the very pattern of an aspiring and cunning Woman,
hoped, That whilst the Princes were in contest
about the Administration of the Government, it would
fall to her share, wherefore she always fomented the
Divisions, by keeping up the Balance betwixt them. 
This Catharine first sided with the House of Guise, dividing
the Administration of Affairs with them, so
that she was to have the supream Administration, the
Duke of Guise was to manage the Military Affairs,
and his Brother the Cardinal the Finances. This Agreement
being made betwixt them, the Constable,
under pretence of his old Age was dismissed from Court,
and the Prince of Conde sent as Ambassadour into spain. 
These, who were thus excluded, had a meeting, to
consider which way they might free themselves from
these Oppressions, where it was resolved that the King
of Navarre should intercede for them at Court; who
being put off with fair words and empty Promiess, set
himself at rest. Conde was resolved to try his Fortune
by force; but having not a sufficient Interest, Coligny
advised him, he should side with the Huguenots (for so
they call•d in France those who professed the Protestant
Religion) who laboured then under a severe Persecution
and wanted a Head, under whose Conduct
they might obtain the free Exercise of their Religion:
Besides that, they mortally hated those of Guise,
whom they supposed to be the Authors of their Persecution. 
The Business was thus concerted; That
the Huguenots should assemble in private, and some of
them by a humble Petition to request the free Exercise
of their Religion at Court; which, if it should be
refused, the rest should be at hand, to kill those of
Guise, and to force the King to receive, the Prince of
Conde for his chief Minister of state. The Execution
of this Design was undertaken by a certain Gentleman
called Renaudie; but the Enterprize being deferred for
some time, because the Court went from Blois to Amboise,
it was discovered, and thereby rendered inpracticable,

above twelve hundred that were taken paying
with their Lives for it; Conde was also sent to Prison,
and was just upon the point of receiving sentence of
Death, when Francis II. after a very short Reign,
died suddenly of an Ulcer in the Head,1560. which caused
great Alterations in the Affairs of the Kigdom. §. 20. Charles IX. Him succeeded his Brother Charles IX. then
scarce eleven Years old, whose Tuition his Mother Catharine
took immediately upon her self, hoping to enjoy
it quietly, whilst the Houses of Bourbon and Guise
were engaged in mutual Quarrels; wherefore she was
very carefull to uphold these Jealousies betwixt them. 
To find an Opportunity to set up the Prince of Conde
and his Party, thereby to balance those of Guise, she
pretended to be no Enemy to the Protestant Religion,
under which Pretence the same was much in request
at Court. To suppress the reformed Religion,
Montmorency, the House of Guise, and the Mareschaal
of st. Andrew, joined in a Confederacy, who calling
themselves the Triumvirate, drew also the King of
Navarre in to their Party. The Conferenec of Poissy. 
          After this a Conference
and Disputation was held betwixt some Divines of both
Religions at Poissy, after which, the Royal Protection
was by a publick Edict, promised to the Protestant
Religion;1562. which from the Month is called the Edict
of January. This extreamly exasperated the Triumvirate,
so that in the very same Year the War commenced. The first Huguenot war. 
The first occasion of it was given by some
belonging to those of Guise, who in a small Town
called Vassy, disturbed the Protestants in the Exercise
of their Religion; and a Quarrel arising thereupon,
killed near threescore of them: Which was the first
Blood shed in this Civil War; and from this time
Things went very strangely in France. It is not our
purpose to enumerate all the Cities that were taken,
neither to speak of all the small skirmishes which are
innumerable, nor the Cruelties committed on both
sides, and the Barbarities of the Rabble; it will be
sufficient for us to touch upon some of the main points. 
In this first War the King of Navarre died of a Wound,
which he received in the siege of Roan, Near Dreux
         
a bloody Battel was fought, where Conde at first had
the Advantage, but his souldiers falling to plundring,
he was beat back again, he himself being made a Prisoner,
and the Mareschal st. Andrew being killed by a
shot, 8000 Men were slain upon the spot, and the Loss
near equal on both sides; the Duke of Guise kept the
Field, but was afterwards, at the siege of Orleans, treacherously
murthered by one Poltrot, with a Pistol-shot,
who was supposed to have committed the Fact by instigation
of Coligny. soon after a Peace was made. 
It is related,1563. that above 50000 Huguenots were slain
in this War; on the other side, they took the Churchplate
and Ornaments, which they having turned into
Money, silver was after this War more currant in
France than before. But Catharine had persuaded her
self, that both Parties were reduced to that Condition,
that she could now handle them at pleasure. After
the Peace was concluded the English were again beaten
out of Havre de Grace, which the Huguenots had given
them as an Acknowledgment for their Assistance. This
Peace lasted no longer than till the Year 1576, when the
Huguenots were persuaded, that at the interview betwixt
Catharine and the Duke of Alba at Bayonne, a League was
set on foot for rooting out the Hereticks: And in effect,
they were immediately after more severely dealt with,
and, as it was reported, the Prince of Conde and Coligny
were to be secured. The second War. The Huguenots therefore began
the second War, during which, the Constable
Annas Montmorency being mortally wounded in an
Engagement, he told a Monk, who at his last Hour
was very troublesome to him; He should let him be at
quiet, since during the Time of 80 Years that he had
lived, he had learned how to employ one quarter of an
Hour in dying. The Huguenots got great Reputation
for Valour in this Engagement, they being much Inferiour
to the other in Number. About the same time
the City of Rochelle declared for the Huguenots, which
afterwards for 60 Years together served them for a secure
Retreat. 1568. Then a second Peace was concluded,
not with an Intention to keep it, but that each Party
might find a better Opportunity to take Advantage
of one another; nor were the Conditions ever fulfilled. 

The War therefore was renewed in the same Year,The Third War during
which the Prince of Conde was killed by a shot,1569. in
a Battel near Jarnack. 
         The Prince of Conde being slain, the King of Navarre is declared Head of the Huguenots. 
          After his Death the Huguenots
declared Henry King of Navarre, the son of Anthony,
who afterwards was King of France, their Head, tho
in effect Coligny had the chief management of Affairs. 
He in vain besieged Poictiers, in the Defence of which
Place the young Duke of Guise gave the first proofs of his
Valour; he was also soundly beaten near Moncontour,
where he lost 9000 Foot. He lost nevertheless nothing
of his former Reputation, for he quickly recollected
his broken Troops, and got together a great Army,
being assisted by Queen Elizabeth with Money, and
by the Paltzgrave with souldiers. 1570. He directed his
March towards Paris, whereupon a Peace was concluded
to the great Advantage of the Huguenots, the
four strong Cities of Rochelle, Montauban, Cagnac and
Charité being given them for their security: But the
main design of this Peace was, that the King perceiving,
that the Huguenots could not be suppressed
by Force, hoped he might win them by Policy, therefore
endeavoured by fair Words and great Promises to
make them secure. The Admiral was caressed at Court,
he being consulted withall concerning an Expedition
to be undertaken against the spaniards in the Netherlands. 
A Marriage also was concluded betwixt
Henry King of Navarre and Margaret the King's sister,
to which Wedding they invited the chief of the
Huguenots,
         The Parisian Massacre, with a Design to cut their Throats in Paris. 
And first of all the Admiral Coligny, as he was
going home from Court, was by sorne Villains, who
were suborned by the Duke of Guise, shot with two
Bullets through the Arm. Then it was agreed, That
in the Year 1571, on the 24th Day of August, early
in the Morning, when the Bells were ringing to Prayers,
all the Huguenots should be massacred, except the
King of Navarre and the young Prince of Conde:
The Execution of this Enterprize the Duke of Guise
had taken upon himself. The beginning of whose
Massacre was made with Coligny, who was ill of his
Wounds; then it fell promiscuously upon the rest,
the Fury of the Mob not ceasing till after seven Days

slaughter. A great many other Cities of France followed
the Example of Paris, so that within few Days
near 30000 were miserably massacred. The King of
Navarre and Prince of Conde were forced to abjure
the Reformed Religion. This was the so much celebrated
Parisian Wedding, which Gabriel Naude would
fain represent us a state's Trick, but this is, in my
Opinion,The Fourth War. a very gross way of arguing. Nevertheless
the Huguenots did quickly recollect themselves, after
the first Consternation was over, renewing the War
with great Animosity and Revenge. During this
War the King's Army besieged Rochelle near eight
Months together, and having lost 12000 Men before
it, News was brought, That the Duke d' Anjou was
elected King of Poland. Hence an Opportunity was
taken to raise the siege with some Reputation, and to
make a Peace the fourth time with the Huguenots;
by vertue of which,1573. the Cities of Rochelle, Montauban
and Nismes were given them for their security. 
But immediately,The Fifth War. in the Year next following, the fifth
War commenced; at which time also a third Faction
arose in France, which was called, that of the Politicians;
they pretended, without having any regard to
the Religious Differences, to seek the publick Welfare,
to have the Queen removed from the Administration
of the Government, and the Italians and those of
Guise to be banished the Kingdom of France. The
Heads of this Faction were those of the House of Montmorency,
who intended, during these Troubles, to
play their own Game. These were afterwards very
instrumental in helping Henry IV. to the Crown. 
During these Troubles Charles IX. died, leaving no
legitimate Issue behind him. §. 21. Henry III. After the Death of Charles IX. the Crown
fell to Henry III. who was at that time in Poland, during
whose absence his Mother Catharine governed the
Kingdom, which was in a very confused Estate. He
left Poland privately, and taking his Way by Vienna
and Venice, arrived safely in France. But after he had
taken upon him the Administration of Affairs, he deceived
every body in those Hopes which were conceived

of him before. For he being addicted only to his Pleasures
and Idleness, was led away by his Favourites,
leaving the chief Administration of the Kingdom to
his Mother. The Huguenots Power encreased remarkably
after the Duke of Alenson, the Kings Brother,
sided with them, and Conde and the Paltzgrave,
John Casimir, led an Army out of Germany into
France; besides that, the King of Navarre found
means to make his escape out of Prison. The fifth
Peace was therefore concluded with the Huguenots,
whereby they obtained very advantageous Conditions. 
About the same time a new Faction was set up,The Holy League. 
which was composed of a great many small ones,
this was called The holy Ʋnion, or League, which
reduced France to the most miserable Condition that
could be. The chief promoter of it was Henry Duke
of Guise, who, perceiving, that the great Authority
which he had among the People, made him to be hated
by the King, endeavoured to make a Party of his
own. He made use especially of the Priests and common
People of Paris; among whom the Name of the
Guises was in great Veneration. He was encouraged
to undertake this Design, because the King was despised
by all, and the Women by their Intrigues, ruled
at Court. Besides this, he pretended to be descended
from the Race of Charles the Great, which was excluded
unjustly from the Crown by Hugh Capet. The
Pretence of this League was the Catholick Religion;
and there was a Draught made of this League, which
contained chiefly three things, viz. The Defence of the
Catholick Religion; the Establishment of Henry III. in
the Throne, and the maintaining the Liberty of the
Kingdom, and the Assembly of the states. Those who
entered into this League promised to be obedient to
such Head or General as should be chosen for the Defence
of this League, all which was confirmed by
Oath. At the first setting up of this League the King
connived at it, hoping thereby the sooner to subdue
the Huguenots; nay, he himself subscribed the same at
the Dyet at Blois,
         1577. declaring himself the Head of this
League. The sixth War. Then the sixth War was begun against the
Huguenots, but the King made Peace with them the

same Year, notwithstanding that they were in a very
ill Condition, neither was any thing done worth mentioning
in this War. The War being ended, the
King returning to his Pleasures, confounded great
summs of Money, and therefore laid new and heavy
Impositions upon the People, and his Favourites grew
very Insolent; which increased the Hatred against
him, and at the same time the Respect and Love of
the People to those of Guise. Besides this, the Duke
of Alenson, the King's Brother, declaring himself
Lord of the Netherlands,
         spain enters the League. 
         Philip King of spain was
provoked to revenge himself of the French, and upheld
the League. The seventh War. In the Year 1579 the seventh War
was begun against the Huguenots, wherein also they
succeeded very ill. Notwithstanding this the King
made a Peace with them in the Year next following
he being unwilling that they should be quite rooted
out, for fear that the League might prove too strong
for himself. The German Horse were also much feared,
and the Duke of Alenson was very forward to have
the Peace concluded, that he might be at leisure to
employ his Forces in the Netherlands. This Peace
lasted five Years, during which time the Hatred against
the King increased daily, because of the heavy Taxes
which were devoured by his Favourites. He made
himself also the more despised by playing too much
the Hypocrite, and by transforming himself almost into
a Monk. The French Glory was also much eclipsed,
when the Duke of Alenson behaved himself so ill in
the Netherlands, and the French Fleet which was sent
to the Assistance of Anthony the Bastard, was totally
ruined near Tercera. But the League grew very
strong after the Death of the Duke of Alenson, the
King's younger Brother, the King having no hopes
of any Issue of his Body: Then it was that the Duke
of Guise proposed to himself no less than the Crown,
tho' he for a colour set up the Cardinal of Bourbon,
thereby to exclude the King of Navarre. And because
it was suspected that the King favoured the King
of Navarre, the Priests began to thunder in the Pulpits,
and to make horrid Exclamations, that the
Catholick Religion was lost; the Duke of Guise entered

into a Confederacy with Philip, who was to furnish
great summs of Money under pretext of maintaining
the Catholick Religion, and to assist the Cardinal
of Bourbon in obtaining the Crown; but in effect,
this Intention was to uphold the Divisions in
France,
         1585. thereby to disenable it to take part with the
Netherlands. Then the Leaguers began to break out
into an open War; and having taken a great many
Towns, obliged the King, according to their Demands,
to forbid the Exercise of the Protestant Religion in
France. 
         The Eighth War. And so began the Eighth War against the
Huguenots, and if the King had been in earnest to ruin
them, they would have been in a very ill Condition:
For tho' the King of Navarre beat the Duke de Joyeuse
near Coutras,
         1587. yet did he not prosecute his Victory. 
And about the same time the Duke of Guise dispersed
the German and swiss Forces, which under the
Command of Fabian de Dona were marching to the
Assistance of the Huguenots. This Army, being destitute
of a good Commander was miserably mauled,
and the rest sent home in a very shamefull Condition. 
This Victory acquired the Duke of Guise great Applause
and Favour among the People, and still lessened
the Value of the King's Person; so that the Priests now
did not stick to exclaim against the King in their sermons,
calling him a Tyrant. The King therefore having
resolved with himself to punish the Heads of the
League in Paris,
         The League force the King from Paris. 
          they broke out into open Rebellion,
and having sent for the Duke of Guise as their Protector,
the King was obliged to leave Paris by Night:
But the King perceiving that more Cities sided daily
with the League,1588. and despairing to overcome them by
Force, took another Course to obtain his Ends, and
made an Agreement with the Duke of Guise, with
great Advantages on his and the Leaguers side: He
pretended also to have forgotten all past Injuries, on
purpose to inveigle the Duke of Guise. And under
these specious pretences he got him to appear at the
Assembly of the Estates at Blois. In the mean time the
Duke of savoy had taken from the French the Marquisate
of saluzze, the only Province left them in Italy:
But the Estates, who were most of them Creatures

of the Duke of Guise, being very urgent in their
Demands, to have the King of Navarre declared incapable
of the Crown, and the Duke of Guise to be
made Constable,The Duke and Cardina of Guise assassinated by the King's Order at Blois. 
          the King caused the Duke of Guise
and his Brother the Cardinal to be murthered. This
put those of the League into a Rage, and with the
Assistance of the Priests, the King was in Paris publickly
declared to have forfeited the Crown. Most of the
great Cities of France being stirred up by the Example
of the Parisians did the same, declaring the Duke de
Maine, Brother to the Duke of Guise, Lieutenant-General
of the state and Crown of France, and supream
Head of the League; who endeavoured, but
in vain,The King makes use of the Huguenots against the League. to surprize the King in Tours. The King
then being overpowered by the League, and besides
this, excommunicated by the Pope, was obliged to
make an Agreement with the King of Navarre and
to make use of the Huguenots. And having got together
a great Army, he marched towards Paris, with
a Resolution to reduce that City to Obedience by
Force of Arms: But the day before the general Attack
was to be made, one James Clement, a Jacobin Monk,
brought a Letter out of the City directed to the King,
which whilst he delivered, pretending to whisper the
King, thrust a Knife into his Bowels, of which Wound he
died the day following:Aug. 2. 1589. The last of the House of Valois. 
        §. 22. Henry IV. 
         Henry IV. whom we hitherto have called
the King of Navarre, and, who was the first of the
House of Bourbon, did at the beginning of his Reign,
meet with no less Difficulties than he had met with
before. For tho' he was lawfull Heir to the Crown,
yet the Protestant Religion, which he professed, was
no small obstacle, for as long as he was addicted to
that, the League, the Pope, and spain, would questionless
oppose him with all their might: But if he
changed his Religion he was in danger of losing the Assistance
of the Huguenots which had been steady to him,
and so set himself betwixt two stools. His Difficulties on the account of his Religion. And it would
have been very unbecoming, to have so publickly accommodated
his Religion to his Interest. Notwithstanding
this, immediately after the Death of Henry III. 

all the great Men of the Army assembled together,
promised him Obedience after several Contests,
under Condition, that within six Months he would
suffer himself to be instructed in the Catholick Religion. 
But because Henry would not be bound to any
certain time, but only gave them some Hopes in
general terms, it was agreed, That the Huguenots
should enjoy the free Exercise of their Religion, yet
that the Catholick Religion should be re-established
in all Cities, and the Revenues restored to the Clergy. 
But, those of the League, because the Duke of Maine
at that time durst not take upon him the Title of
King, proclaimed the Cardinal of Bourbon, an ancient
decrepid Man, Uncle to King Henry, and who was
then in Custody, their King, declaring the Duke de
Maine Lieutenant-General of the Crown. The Leaguers
made the strongest Party, having on their side
the Common People, most of the great Cities, all the
Parliaments except that of Rennes and Bourdeaux, almost
all the Clergy, spain, the Pope, and the rest of
the Catholick Princes, except Venice and Florence. 
But the Heads were not very unanimous, and the
Duke de Maine had not Authority enough to keep
them in Unity. But on the King's side were almost
all the Nobility, the whole Court of the deceased King,
all the Protestant Princes and states, the old Huguenot
Troops, who had done great service to Henry,
and would still have done more, if they had not
mistrusted him, that he would change his Religion. 
Each Party watched an Opportunity of surprizing one
another. The Duke of Maine endeavouring to surprize
the King near Diep, was bravely repulsed, which
seemed to be ominous to the League. On the other
Hand, the King could not get Paris tho' he had taken
the suburbs. But Henry was not only pestered by the
League, but also for want of Money, was obliged to
keep up his Party with fair Words and Promises. 
The spaniards also began to intermeddle publickly in
the Affairs of France, in hopes in this Juncture either
to conquer the Kingdom, or to divide it, or at least
to weaken it. But the Duke de Maine did underhand
oppose these Designs, being unwilling, that in

case he could not be King himself, France should fall
under the subjection of spain. In the Year 1590,
Henry obtained a glorious Victory over the Duke de
Maine, who had double the Number, near Ivry. 
Then he blocked up Paris, which was reduced to the
greatest Extremity by Famine, but relieved by the
Duke of Parma Governour of the Netherlands. In
the Year 1591, there arose a third Faction, the young
Cardinal of Bourbon making Pretensions to the Crown,
but was very fortunately disappointed in his Aim by
the King. The Pope Excommunicates Henry. 
          Then Pope Gregory XIV. excommunicated
Henry, exhorting all his subjects to withdraw themselves
from their Obedience, which Difficulty Henry
did not surmount without great troubles. The spaniards
also declared themselves more freely, Philip offering
his Daughter Isabella Clara Eugenia to be made
Queen of France; which Proposal was mightily encouraged
by the young Duke of Guise, he being then
just escaped out of his Custody, as 'tis supposed, by
connivance of the King, who supposed, that thereby
that Party might be divided, since he would certainly
endeavour to oppose the Designs of the Duke de
Maine his Uncle. Proposals about setting up another King. After the Duke of Parma had raised
the siege of Roan, the spaniards urged more and more,
that the French would take a Resolution concerning
the setting up of another King. And in the Assembling
of the Estates in Paris, which was held for that
purpose,1593. it was proposed, That Isabella the Daughter
of Philip, being born of a French Mother, should be
declared Queen of France, and that she should have
for her Husband Ernest Arch-Duke of Austria. But
the French refusing to accept of a Foreigner for their
King, Charles Duke of Guise was proposed as a Husband
to Isabella. This Proposition relished very ill
with the Duke of Maine, who thought himself so
well deserving, that no body ought to be preferred before
him; wherefore, if he could not have the Crown,
he was resolved no body else should have it, and so
emploied all his Cunning, that there was nothing determined
in the Assembly concerning this Proposition;
the King, however, plainly perceived, That if he did
not change his Religion, his Affairs must needs grow

worse, especially, since these Catholicks, who hitherto
had been of his Party did threaten to leave him, if
he did not perform his Promise. He called therefore
the Bishops together,The King changes his Religion. who instructed him in the Catholick
Faith, and having received Absolution, he
went,1593. to st. Denys's Chapel to Mass. And that the
People might tast the sweetness of Peace, and desire
it, he made a Truce of three Months, which proved
very successfull, especially, since the fundamental Pretence,
namely, Henry's being a Heretick, was now removed. 
Vitry and the City of Meaux were the first
that surrendered themselves to the King in the same
Year,several Cities surrender to him. upon very advantageous Conditions; Aix, Lyons,
Orleans, Bourges and other Cities soon followed
their Example. And to encourage the rest to do the
same, the King caused himself to be Crowned and Anointed
in Chartres, Rheims being as yet in the hands
of the League. Not long after Paris was also surrendred
by the Governour Brissac; and here the King was
received with such joyfull Acclamations of the People,
as if they had never been his Enemies, the spanish Garrison
being turned out with Ignominy, and the hissing
of the Common people. Then all the rest of the Cities
and Governours surrendred themselves to the King
on very advantageous Conditions, which the King was
willing to grant them, that he might once be put in
quiet possession of the Crown, and drive the spaniards
out of France. The young Duke of Guise submitted
himself, being made Governour of Provence. Then
Henry denounced War against spain, not only to revenge
himself for what Troubles they had created to
him before, but also to please the Huguenots, and to
root out of the People their affection for the spaniards. 
These were the Fruits Philip reapt for so many Millions,
which he had bestowed in supporting the League. 
In the beginning of the same Year,1594. a Knife was by a
certain desperate Ruffian,The King assaulted and wounded by a Ruffian. called John Castel, thrust
into the King's Mouth, whereby he lost one of his
Teeth. It was the King's good fortune that he just
bowed himself, this Villain's aim having been at his
Throat:The Jesuits banished, And because it was found out, that the Jesuits
had been tampering with him, whose Principles

also were thought very dangerous, they were banished
out of France, but some years after restored again. 
Afterwards the Duke of Nevers being sent to Rome
to obtain Absolution for King Henry, the same was
granted by the Pope, who had been very averse hitherto
to Henry; but perceiving that he would maintain
his Crown in spite of him, was now for ingratiating
himself with the King. Then the Dukes of Maine,
and Espernon, and Marseilles were received again into
the King's favour. But the War against spain did
not succeed according to wish. For tho' the King had
got some advantages over them in the Franche Comte,
and had beat the spaniards out of Han in Picardy; yet
on the other side, these took Dourlans and Cambray,
the latter of which had been hitherto in the Possession of
Balagny under French protection; and in the Year 1596,
next following, they took Calais and Ardres. And tho'
the King took from the spaniards Fere, yet was that
a very slender compensation of his Losses. But there
happened another great Misfortune; For the spaniards
in the Year next following took the City of Amiens by
surprize, which was not re-taken without great pains. 
In the Year 1598, the Duke of Mercoeur, who hitherto
had stood out resolutely in Bretany, did at last submit
himself, hoping thereby to obtain the said Dukedom. 
And to set the Huguenots at rest, he published
for their security that famous Edict of Nants,
         The Edict at Nants. 
          as it is
called, by virtue of which they have hitherto enjoyed
the free Exercise of Religion. At last a Peace was concluded
betwixt Henry and the spaniards at Vervins,
         The Peace of Vervins. 
         
with Conditions, that such Places as were taken since
the Year 1559, should be restored on both sides. A
Peace being thus concluded, and Henry resolved to be
even with the Duke of savoy, who under his Predecessour's
Reign had taken saluzze, and during the intestine
Wars had raised great Troubles in Dauphine and
Provence, in hopes to snatch away a piece of the dismembred
Kingdom; and tho' the Duke came in
Person into France, and promised to the King to give
him some other Places in exchange of the former; yet
was he not in earnest, in hopes to be upheld by spain,
or that the Marshal de Biron, with whom he kept private

Intelligence, should renew the civil Commotions. 
But the King fell upon him,He takes from the Duke of savoy, all that he possessed on this side the Alpes. 
          and took from the Duke
all what he was possessed of on this side of the Alpes. 
At last, by Mediation of the Pope, an agreement was
made, that the Duke should give to France, in exchange
for saluzze, La Bresse, Bugey, Valromay en Gex. 
The Italian Princes were very ill satisfied with this
Peace,1600. since there being no door left for France to enter
Italy, Italy was left to the discretion of the spaniard. 
But Henry being tired with so long and tedious
War, was resolved at last to enjoy the sweet Fruits of
Peace after so many years Troubles. But soon after a
dangerous Conspiracy was discovered,The Conspiracy of the Marshal de Biron. 
          contrived by the
Mareschal de Biron, who intended with the Assistance
of the spaniards to depose the King, and to dismember
the Kingdom, by setting up a great many petty Principalities;
having agreed with the rest, to have for his
share the Dukedom of Burgundy. And he refusing to
accept of the King's Mercy, which he was willing to
grant him in consideration of his great Deserts, was
condemned,1602. and his Head cut off. The King being
now at Peace, did employ all his Thoughts, how France
might recover it self after such tedious Wars, and that
good Ordinances might be established, but especially
that his Revenues might be encreased. He established
for this purpose all sorts of Manufactories,He introduces Manufacturies. and especially
that of silk, (which afterwards drew great Riches
into that Kingdom. ) But even in the midst of Peace
he was continually troubled with his Queen, who was
jealous about his Mistrisses; and the spaniards were always
plotting both against his Person and Crown. On
the other hand, Henry had a design to oppose the growing
Power of the House of Austria,
         His Design to put a stop to the growth of the House of Austria. 
          by keeping it within
the Bounds of spain, and the Hereditary Countries
in Germany. And 'tis said, that for that purpose he
concerted Measures with the Northern Crown, with
Holland, with the Protestant Princes of Germany, with
the Elector of Bavaria, the Duke of savoy, the swiss,
and even the Pope himself. To put this design in execution,
he took the opportunity of those Differences
which were then on foot concerning the succession in
the Country of Juliers, which, that it might not be

devoured by the House of Austria, he was resolved to
prevent with all his Might. This is certain, that his
Preparations were greater, than seemed to be requisite
only for the business of Juliers; for he and his Allies
had got 120000 Men together, and prodigious summs
of Money. The House of Austria on the other hand
did not make the least Preparations, just as if it had
fore-known the fatal Blow, which happened soon after:
The Army was marching towards the Netherlands,
and the King ready to follow in a few days, having
caused the Queen to be Crowned, and constituted
her Regent during his absence; When the King
going along the street in Paris in his Coach, which
was fain to stop by reason of the great Croud of the
People,He is Assassinated by Ravillac. 
          was by a desperate Ruffian, whose Name was
Francis Ravillac, stabbed with a Knife in his Belly,
so that he without uttering one word died immediately. May 14. 1610. 
There are some, who make no-question of it,
but that this Villain was set on to commit this fact,
and that it was not done without the knowledge of
the spaniards and the Queen her self. And so fell this
great Hero by the hands of a profligate Wretch, after
he had surmounted great Difficulties in ascending the
Throne, and had avoided above fifty several Conspiracies;
which being most contrived by the Priests against
his Life, were all timely discovered. His Death
proved very pernicious to the Kingdom, because, during
the Minority of his son, the Power of the Great
Men, and also of the Huguenots, did extreamly encrease. §. 23. His son Lewis XIII. succeeded him,Lewis XIII. being
scarce nine Years of Age, and under the Tuition of his
Mother Mary de Medicis, she endeavoured to preserve
Peace abroad by Alliance, and at home by Clemency
and Liberality towards the great Men of the Kingdom,
who nevertheless several times raised Disturbances,
whereby they made their own advantage, the Queen-Regent
being not Powerfull enough to keep them in
Obedience by force. As soon as the King had taken
upon himself the Management of Affairs,1617. he caused
Concini, Marshal d' Ancre, who was born a Florentine,
to be killed, he having been in great Power during the

Queen's Regency, and by his Pride, Riches and Power,
drawn upon himself the Hatred of the subjects; by his
Death he hoped to appease the dissatisfied Multitude. 
The Queen-Mother was sent away from Court to Blois,
from whence she was carried away by the Duke d' Espernon. 
And these Commotions were at last appeased
by bestowing liberal Presents among the Great Men. 1619. 
About the same time Richlieu,
         Richlieu comes in play. afterwards made a
Cardinal, began to be in great Esteem in Court, who
advised the King to establish his Authority, and to
take up by the Roots the intestine Evils of France. 
He laid this down as a fundamental Principle, That he
should take from the Huguenots the power of doing him
any mischief, considering that such as were dissatisfied
at any time, or that were of a turbulent spirit, took
always refuge, and were assisted by them. The first
beginning was made in the King's Patrimonial Province
of Bearn, where he caused the Catholick Religion
to be re-established. The Huguenots being greatly
dissatisfied thereat, began to break out into Violence,
whence the King took an opportunity to recover several
Places from them, but sustained a considerable Loss
in the siege of Montauban, till at last Peace was made
with the Huguenots, under condition that they should
demolish all their new Fortifications, except those of
Montauban and Rochelle. In the Year 1625, Cardinal
Richlieu was made Chief Minister of France,
         Made chief Minister of state. about
which time also the second War with the Huguenots
was ended. But this Peace did not last long, because
those of Rochelle would not bear, that the Fortress called
Fort-Lewis, should be built just under their Noses. 
Richlieu therefore having taken a resolution at once
to put an end to this War by the taking of Rochell, besieged
it so close both by sea and Land, that the English,
who had had very ill success in the Isle of Rhée,
where they Landed, could bring no succours into the
place. Rochelle taken. 
          Their Obstinacy was at last over-come by Famine,
of 18000 Citizens, there having been not above
5000 left, for they had lived without Bread for thirteen
Weeks. With this stroke the strength of the
Huguenots was broken, Montauban upon the persuasion
of the Cardinal having demolished its Works. 

The cunning Duke of Roan also at last made his peace,
after he had been sufficiently troublesome to the King
in Languedoc, under condition, that the Cities of
Nismes and Montpelier should demolish their Fortifications;
but for the rest, enjoy the free Exercise of
their Religion. And thus the Ulcer, which had settled
it self in the very Entrails of France, was happily healed
up. The Effects of the Civil Wars. It is related by some, that these Civil Wars
have devoured above a Million of People; that 150
Millions were employed in paying of the souldiers;
that nine Cities, 400 Villages, 20000 Churches, 2000
Monasteries,A War in Italy. 
          and 100000 Houses were burnt or laid level
with the ground. Then France applied all their
care towards Foreign Affairs. 1628. The King assisted the
Duke of Nevers, in obtaining the Dukedom of Mantua,
which belonged to him by Right of succession,
but whom the spaniards endeavoured to exclude from
the same, as being a French-man. In this War the
siege of Casal is most famous, in the defence of which
place, the French gave incredible proofs of their Bravery. 
At last the business was,The first Occasion of Mazarini's Greatness. through the wise Management
of the Popish Nuncio Mazarini (who then
laid the first Foundation of his future Greatness in
France) composed, and the Duke of Nevers afterwards
by the Treaty made at Chierasco, established
in the Dukedoms of Mantua and Montferrat. The
King also bought Pignerol of the Duke of savoy,
         How Pignerol came into the hands of the French. 
          that
so the French might not want a door into Italy. France
had also before taken part with the Grisons against
the Inhabitants of the Valteline, who had revolted
being assisted by the spaniards, whereby he prevented
this Country from falling into the Hands of the
spaniards, and so Matters were restored to their former
state. In the Year 1631, France made an Alliance
with sweden, allowing to that King a yearly
Pension, to assist him in opposing the Greatness of the
House of Austria. But when King Gustavus Adolphus
began to be formidable on the Rhine, he took the
Elector of Treves into his protection, putting a Garrison
into Hermanstein, (which nevertheless in the Year
1636,The Queen Mother raises Troubles. was forced to a surrender by Famine. ) In the
mean time the Queen-Mother and the Kings Brother

the Duke of Orleans envying the Greatness of Richelieu
had raised some tumults. With them also sided
Montmorency, who paid for it with his Head, and put
an inglorious end to his noble Family, which boasted
to have been the first noble Family that embraced the
Christian Religion in France. And tho' this business was
afterwards Composed, the Queen Mother being received
into Favour again, yet was she so dissatisfied, because
she could not Act according to her own Will; that she
retired into Flanders, and from thence into England,
where she made some stay,1642. and at last died in a very
low Condition in Cologne. 
         The King takes Lorrain from that Duke. In the Year 1633. the King
took from the Duke of Lorrain his Countrey, because
he had declared himself for the Emperour. And
when afterwards,1634. 
         viz. after the Battel fought near
Nordlingen the swedish Affairs were in a very low
Condition, and the House of Austria began to hold
up its Head again, France broke out into open War
with spain, to balance the growing Power of the
House of Austria. He took for a pretence that the
spaniards had surprized the City of Treves, and taken
the Elector of Treves Prisoner, who was under French
protection. And then the War began in Italy, Germany,
the Netherlands and Roussilion, which was carried
on with various Fortune; yet so, that the French
got the better of it at last. To touch upon some of
the most remarkable Actions: The first Attack which
the French made in the Netherlands did not succeed
very well, they having been forced to raise the siege
of Lovain with great Loss. 1636. In the Year 1636, Piccolomini
marched into Picardy, and Galias into Burgundy,
but did nothing of moment. On the other hand the
French beat up the siege of Leucate in Roussilion,
         1638. and
the brave Duke Barnhard of saxen-Weimar took the
Fortress of Brisac, he carrying on the War with
French Money. And after the Death of this Duke,
which happened not long after, the King of France
brought both that Fortress and his Army over to its
side with Money. Yet the French miscarried in the
same Year before st. Omer and Fontarabia, before the
last of which Places the Prince of Conde sustained a considerable
Loss. In the same Year, viz. on the 5th. of

         september, Lewis XIV. was, almost by a Miracle, born
of a Marriage, which had proved unfruitfull for twenty
Years before. In the Year 1639, the French were
beaten before Thionville. In the Year 1640, they took
Arras, and in the same Year Catalonia, revolting from
spain, threw it self under the French Protection. In
the Year 1641, a great Misfortune hung over Richlieu's
Head, the Count the soissons having raised a dangerous
Rebellion; but, he being killed in an Engagement,
wherein otherwise his Party had the better, established,
by his Death, the Cardinal's Authority, and
the Quiet of France. In the Year 1642, Perpignan
was taken, at which siege the King and Richlieu were
both present. Monsieur Cinqmats did about that time
first insinuate himself into the King's favour, hoping
thereby to undermine Richlieu. And the better to
balance the Cardinal, he had made some under-hand
Intrigues with spain. But the Cardinal having discovered
the business, caused his Head to be cut off; as
also de Thou the younger's, because he had been privy
to the business; tho' he had advised against it, yet had
he not discovered it. From the Duke of Bouillon, who
had been also of the Cabal, he took for a Punishment
his strong Hold, sedan. In the same Year Richlieu died,
to his great good fortune, the King being grown quite
weary of him, notwithstanding he had laid the first
Foundation of the Greatness of France,
         May 14. 1643. which is now
so formidable to Europe. The King also died not long
after. §. 24. Lewis XIV. Lewis XIV. was but Five years of Age when
he came to the Crown, his Mother 'tis true bore the
name of Regent of France, but in effect the Cardinal
Julius Mazarini had the chief Management of the
Kingdom;Mazarini's Ministry. 
          which was then in a very flourishing Condition;
but every Body was for enriching himself out
of the Kings Purse during his Minority; and Mazarini
was very liberal, thereby endeavouring to make them
in love with his Government. But the Treasury being
become empty, new Taxes were of necessity to
be imposed upon the People which caused a great
dissatisfaction against the Government. Nevertheless

for the first Five years every thing was pretty quiet
at home, and War carried on abroad. At the very
first beginning of this new Government the Duke
d' Austria obtained a signal Victory against the spaniards
near Rocroy; after which he took Thionville,
and Gaston the Kings Uncle Graveling;
         1644. 
         Anguin
revenged the loss which the French had sustainded the
Year before near Dutlingen, and, having first beaten
the Bavarian Forces near Friburg in Brisgaw, he
took Philipsburg; in the Year 1646. he beat the Bavarian
Troops near Norlingen, and afterwards took Dunkirk. 
But in the Year next following he in vain besieged
the City of Lorida. 
         Peace of Munster. 
          In the Year 1648. a Peace
was concluded at Munster in Westphalia, betwixt the
Emperour and France, by Vertue of which the latter
got the two Fortresses of Brisac and Philipsburg,
the Countrey of Puntgau, and part of the upper Alsatia. 
But as France by this Peace was freed from
one Enemy,The intestine Commotions. so on the other hand the intestine Commotions
put a stop to its great Progresses. The chief
reason of these Troubles was, that some envying Mazarini,
as being a Foreigner, they would by all means
have him removed from the Helm, and this they sought
with the greater Importunity, because they were not
in awe of the King, who was but a Child, neither of
his Mother, she being an outlandish Woman. some
of the great Men also were for fishing in troubled Waters:
But above all the rest, the Prince of Conde
would fain have been Master, and have made the Cardinal
dance after his Pipe. The Cardinal was for
bringing of him over to his Party by a Marriage proposed
to him; but the Prince of Conde perceiving that
the Cardinal was for maintaining his old Post, nor
would depend on him, rejected the Offer as unbecoming
the Grandeur of his House. There were also
some Women of a restless spirit concerned in these Intrigues,
among whom was Mad. de Longueville, sister
of the Prince of Conde, Mad. Chevreuse, Mombazon,
and others. The first beginning was by slanderous
Papers and Libels which were daily dispersed in Paris. 
         1648. 
There was also a certain Faction set up,The slingers. who called
themselves the slingers, because they openly undertook

to knock down the Cardinal, as David struck
down the Giant Goliah by the help of his sling. 
The Heads of this Faction were the Duke of Beaufort,
and Guadi the Archbishop of Paris, afterwards called
the Cardinal de Rez. With this Party also sided the
Parliament of Paris, which did pretend to have a
great Authority against the Government at that time. 
The first Insurrection was made in Paris, occasioned
by the taking into Custody of one Braussel a Member
of the Parliament, whereupon the King left the City. 
Yet the Business was composed for that time, some
things having been granted to the mutinous Party. 
But the Faction of the slingers renewing their former
Disturbances,The King forced to leave Paris, 1649. the King left the City a second time. 
The Parliament having then publickly condemned the
Cardinal, grew every day stronger, Turenne, who then
commanded the French Army in Germany, having declared
for that side; but he was fain to leave the Army,
which was kept in Duty by the help of a good summ
of Money. And tho' Matters were afterwards reconciled
a second time at st. Germains, yet the Design against
Mazarin was not laid aside; the Prince of
Conde, who had brought over the slingers to his Party,
not ceasing to stir them up against him. But because
they had a different Aim, for the slingers were for totally
pulling down of the Cardinal, but the Prince of
Conde would only have humbled him, the Cardinal
cunningly raised a misunderstanding betwixt them,
by setting the Prince of Conde against the slingers. 
Whereupon the slingers were reconciled with the
Cardinal. The Cardinal taking hold of this Opportunity,
caused the Prince of Conde and his Brother the
Prince of Conti, and their Brother-in-law the Duke
of Longueville to be taken into Custody. The Imprisonment of the Princes. This was
putting Fuel into the Fire, every body being dissatisfied
at the Imprisonment of the Princes. The City
of Bourdeaux openly rebelled. The spaniards upon
this Occasion took from the French, Piombino and Porto
Longone in Italy. The Archduke Leopold struck
Terrour into the City of Paris it self, on the side of
the Netherlands. And tho' the Cardinal beat Turenne
near Rethel, he being gone over to the spaniards, yet

the Hatred against him encreased daily, and the Faction
of the slingers, the Parliament, and the Duke of
Orleans were absolutely for having the Princes set at
Liberty. The Cardinal therefore perceiving that nothing
was to be done by open Violence, resolved to avoid
the storm, by setting the Princes at Liberty:
And he himself retired to Bruel, the Court of the
then Elector of Collen. 
         1651. Then he was by a Decree of
the Parliament for ever banished the Kingdom of
France. 
         The Cardinal banished France. 
          
         Mazarini being thus removed, the Prince of
Conde began to disturb the publick Quiet with more
freedom, having engaged himself with the spaniards,
and being gone to Bourdeaux, he began to make open
War against the Government. And the spaniards
taking hold of this Opportunity, recovered Barcellona,
and with it all Catalonia. 
         The Queen recalls him. Then the Queen recalled
the Cardinal, who having strengthened the King's
Army by such Troops as he had got together, fought
several times very briskly with the Prince of Conde. 
But seeing that the Hatred which the Faction of the
slingers and the Parliament had conceived against
him, did not diminish, he took this Course, that he
publickly declared, he was willing to leave the Kingdom,
to re-establish the publick Quiet. He hoped
by so doing, to lay the Blame of the Intestine Divisions
upon the Prince of Conde alone; which Design
proved successfull; for thereby the Eyes of the People
were opened, who now plainly perceived, that the
Cardinal sought the Good of the King and Kingdom,
but the Prince of Conde his own Interest, Dunkirk
and Graveling being lost in the Fray. The Prince of
Conde therefore perceiving that he had lost the Favour
of the People, retired with his Troops into the spanish
Netherlands. Then the Cardinal returned to Court,
and ever after had the Administration of the chiefest
Affairs of the Kingdom till his Death, without any
further Opposition. The City of Paris returned to
its due Obedience, the Faction of the slingers was
dissolved, the Duke of Orleans left the Court; Rez
was taken into Custody, and Bourdeaux forced to submit. 
In the Year next following the French began again
to make War on the spaniards;
         1653. they took Mommedy
         
with great difficulty, and fortunately relieved
Arras: But they were beaten from before Valenciennes
and Cambray. France having just made an Alliance
with Cromwell,
         1658. the joint Forces of France and England
besieged Dunkirk under the Command of Turenne:
And the Duke John d' Austria and Prince de
Conde,
who came with an Army to relieve it, being
repulsed with great loss, the City was taken and delivered
to the English, from whom the King afterwards
redeemed it for four Millions. 1662. About the same time
Graveling was also retaken. The Pyrenaean Peace, 1659. At last a Peace was concluded
between France and spain near the Pyrenaean
Mountains by the two chief Ministers of state, on
both sides, viz. by Mazarini and Don Lewis de Haro,
by vertue of which, France was to keep Roussilion
and the greatest part of the places which were taken
in the Netherlands; Mary Theresa, the Daughter of
Philip IV. was to be married to the King, and the
Prince of Conde to be received into Favour again. This
last point met with great Opposition for a considerable
time. The Death of Mazarini. 
          In the Year next following died Mazarini,
who, as 'tis said, left the King among others,
this Lesson, That he should govern himself, and not
trust entirely to any Favourite. The first thing of moment,
which the King undertook, was, to settle his
Revenues in a good order. 1661. He began with the Lord
High Treasurer Fouquet, whom he took into Custody,
and made a strict Inquisition against all such as
having had hitherto the management of his Revenues,
had enriched themselves therewith: The sponges
which were swelled up with Riches, being soundly
squeezed out, brought an incredible Treasure into the
King's Coffers. A Dispute about Precedency between the French and spanish Embassadours. In the Year 1661 a Difference arose
betwixt the French and spanish Embassadours in London,
about the Precedency at the solemn Entry made
by Count Nile Brake the swedish Embassadour, where
the French Embassadour's Coach was put back by
Violence. This might easily have proved the Occasion
of a War, if the spaniards had not given satisfaction
to the French, and agreed, That where-ever there
were any French Embassadours resident, the spanish
should not appear upon any publick Occasions: Which

the French do interpret, as if spain had thereby declared,
That the spanish Ministers were always to give
place to the French of the same Character. In the
Year 1662,A Treaty with the Duke of Lorrain. 
          the King made an Agreement with the
Duke of Lorrain, according to which, he was to exchange
his Dukedom for an Equivalent in France,
and his Family to be the next in right of succession,
if the Family of Bourbon should happen to fail:
Which Agreement the Duke would fain have annulled
afterwards, but the King, who did not understand
jesting in such a point, forced him to surrender to him
Marsal. 
         A Differance with the Pope. In the same Year the Duke de Crequi the
French Embassadour at Rome, was grossly affronted
there by the Corsi Guards, which the King resented
so ill, that he took from the Pope the City of Avignon:
But the Difference was composed by the Mediation
of the Grand Duke of Tuscany at Pisa, and the Pope
was fain to send a splendid Embassy to give satisfaction
to the King. About the same time the French
would have got footing at Gigeri on the Coast of
Barbary, but were repulsed with considerable loss by
the Moors. 
         1664. The King also sent some Troops to the
Assistance of the Emperour against the Turks, who behaved
themselves bravely in the Battel fought near
st. Gothard, and contributed much to the Victory. 
Notwithstanding which the Emperour clapt up a
Peace with the Turks, fearing lest the King of France
might make use of this Opportunity to fall into the
Netherlands. Yet those Forces, which were sent to
the Assistance of the Venetians into Candie, did not
acquire so much Glory, they being too forward and
hot in the first Onset, where they lost the Duke of
Beaufort. In the Year 1665, the King of France
kindled a War betwixt the English and Dutch, thereby
to weaken their Naval Force, which was so formidable
to him, and in the mean while to get leisure to
conquer the Netherlands. 
         He attacks Flanders. 
          In the Year 1667, he entered
the Netherlands in person, and took Charleroy,
Lisle, Tournay, Doway, Courtray, Oudenarde, and
some other places, pretending, that the Netherlands
did belong to him in right of his Queen, by vertue of
the jus devolutionis or right of devolution, in Brabant,
         
notwithstanding that in the Marriage Contract
she had renounced all her Title to it. He also conquered
the County of Burgundy, but after having demolished
the Fortifications he restored it again, but
kept those places which he had taken in the Netherlands,
by vertue of the Peace concluded at Aix la Chapelle. 
The tripple Alliance,Peace made at Aix la Chapelle, 1668. as it is called, made betwixt
sweden, England and Holland, which was intended
for the Preservation of the Netherlands, did greatly
hasten this Peace; tho' France afterwards found out a
way to draw the English Court from this Alliance,
and to join with him in humbling the Hollanders,
who he said were too proud. For tho' France all along
had been in the Interest of Holland, yet the King
took it very ill, that the Dutch had made a Peace at
Munster without including France, and that they had
been so bold as to undertake the Preservation of the
Netherlands;
         1667. and when afterwards the King put
strong Garrisons into the conquered places, they sent
a Fleet on these Coasts, as it were to brave him. The
tripple Alliance also was displeasing to him, and some
are of Opinion, that the King of England, who had
not forgot the Business at Chatam, and that the Peace
concluded at Breda was not according to his wish,
had engaged himself in this Alliance, only to draw in
the Dutch thereby, and so to exasperate the King of
France against them. He invades Flanders, 1672. At last, France in conjunction
with England, made War on Holland, with prodigious
success at first; for he took three Provinces, viz. 
Gueldres, Over-yssel and Ʋtrecht; besides that he had
already possessed himself of some Passes leading into
Holland: But his Confederate the Bishop of Munster
had not the same success in the siege of Groningen,
and afterwards lost Coeverden again. And the Dutch
had better success at sea, where they behaved themselves
bravely in four several Engagements, whereas
the French Fleet, as the English say, did not engage
heartily: Besides, England grew Jealous of the great
success of the French, which was one reason, why the
Parliament did in a manner oblige the King, to make
a separate Peace with Holland, fearing, that France,
after England and Holland had destroied one another

at sea, might also, at last, fall upon them. The Emperour
and Elector of Brandenburgh endeavoured, immediately
at the beginning of the War, to give a
Diversion to France but to no great purpose, since
they did nothing but ruin several Provinces in Germany,
and drew Turenne with his Army thither, who
ravaged the Country, but especially Westphalia. The
Elector of Brandenburgh made a Peace with France
at Vossem,
         1673. whereby he got the Restitution of his
strong Holds in the Dutchy of Cleves, but as soon as
he got them into his possession,Mastricht taken by the French. 
          he made no great account
of the Peace. In the Year next following,
France took the strong City of Mastricht, where the
French both shewed their Bravery and Dexterity in
attacking of places. On the other hand, the Imperialists
had good success against Turenne, who pretended
to oppose their March; for they tricked him, and
having marched to the lower Rhine, in conjunction with
the spaniard and Prince of Orange, took Bon: This,
and the loss of Narden, which the Dutch took, caused
the French to leave Ʋtrecht and all the other places
in the United Provinces, except Grave and Mastricht:
For it seemed very difficult to maintain so many
Garrisons, and at the same time to have a sufficient
Army in the Field to oppose the Enemy; since it
might easily have happened, that all Correspondency
with these places in the United Provinces might have
been cut off by the Enemy. Afterwards spain and
the whole German Empire declared against France,
and a great many were of Opinion, That the joint
Power of spain, Holland and Germany, would be
sufficient to curb the French, and to carry the seat of
the War into France it self; but this could not be effected. 
'Tis true, the Germans did take from the
French, Philipsburgh, and beat them out of Treves,
where Mareschal de Crequi received a Defeat. But on
the other hand, the Germans were several times also,
especially near sintsheim and in Alsace, worsted by the
French, and obliged to repass the Rhine. And in the
Year 1675, there was a great probability that it would
not have gone very well with them on this side of the
Rhine,
         The Death of Turenne. 
          if the brave Turenne had not been killed by an

accidental shot, which obliged the French, who were
ignorant of his Design, after a sharp Engagement, to
retire on the other side of the Rhine. For the rest,
spain lost most by this War: for the Franche Compte
was taken from them,The Losses of the spaniards in this War. 
         Messina received voluntarily
a French Garrison, and the Dutch Fleet which was
sent to the Assistance of the spaniards into sicily, got
nothing but Blows, the brave Admiral de Ruyter being
there slain; tho' afterwards the French quitted
Messina on their own accord. Besides this the French
took from them these strong holds; Limburgh, Conde,
Valenciennes, Cambray, Yper, st. Omer, Aire and
several others. The Prince of Orange retook Graves,
but in the Battel of seneffe and st. Omer, he was worsted,
and sustained a considerable loss before Mastricht,
At last France ended this War very gloriously for it
self,Peace at Nimmegen. 
          restoring to Holland what it had taken from those
Provinces, but kept Burgundy and a great many strong
places in the spanish Netherlands. In Germany in
lieu of Philipsburgh it got Friburgh, and for the rest
the Westphalian and Copenhagen Treaties were renewed,
by Virtue of which sweden was restored to its
own again. §. 25. To consider the French Nation,The French Nation. whose History
we have briefly related, it must be observed, That
it is swarming (if I may so speak) with People, and
sowed thick with Cities and Towns. Under the Reign
of Charles IX. it is related, That above twenty Millions
of People paid the Poll Tax. some say, That
Richlieu affirmed, that by Computation, France could
bring into the Field 600000 Foot, and 150000 Horse,
provided every Man that was able to bear Arms, did
go into the Field. This Nation also has been always
warlike: nevertheless in former times, it has been objected
to them, That they were very brave at the first
Onset, but after their first Fury was a little cooled, their
Courage used to slacken, if they met with a stout and
brave Resistance: wherefore they used to make great
Conquests, but seldom kept them very long. And
after they had good success, they used to grow careless,
insult over the conquered, and put them to great

Hardships under their Government. But in our last
Wars they have shewn sufficiently, that they as little
want Constancy at last, as Heat and Fury at first. 
There is a great number of Nobles in France,
         Full of Nobility. who
make Profession of the sword, and make no difficulty
to expose themselves to any Hazards to gain Glory. 
In former times, the French Infantry was good for nothing,
wherefore they always used to employ swiss
and scotch: but now a-days, their Foot are very good,
and in attacking of a place, they are to be preferred before
all other Nations. This Nation always hath a great
Veneration and Love for their King; and as long as he
is able to maintain his Authority, is ready to sacrifice
Life and Estate for his Glory. The French are also
brisk, forward, and of a merry Constitution: as to
their outward appearance in their Apparel and Behaviour,
they are generally very comely;Their Natural Qualities. and some other
Nations, whose temper is more inclined to gravity, and
do attempt to imitate them, appear often very ridiculous,
there being a vast difference in these matters, betwixt
what is natural and what is affected. They are
of a Genius fit to undertake any thing, whether it be
in Learning, Trade, or Manufactures; especially in
those things which depend more on ingenuity and dexterity
than hard labour. On the other side, the levity
and inconstancy of the French is generally blamed,
which is easily to be perceived by such of them as are
raw and unpolished; and a great many of them glory
in amorous Intrigues, oftentimes more than is true;
and under Pretence of Freedom, they commit great
Debaucheries. §. 26. The Country which is possessed by this potent
Nation,The Nature of the Country. is very conveniently situated, almost in
the very midst of the Christian World; wherefore this
King may conveniently keep Correspondence with
them all, and prevent Europe from falling into the
hands of any one Prince. On the one side, it has the
Mediterranean, on the other the Ocean, and on both
sides a great many pretty good Harbours; and is well
watered with Rivers; besides that great Channel with
twelve sluces, by which the present King has joyned

the Rivers of Garonne and the Aude, and consequently
the Mediterranean with the Ocean; which proves very
beneficial for Trade. It is also very near of a circular
Figure, and well compacted, so that one Province may
easily assist another. Its situation. On the side of spain, the Pyrenaean
Mountains; and on the Italian side, the Alpes
are like a Bullwark to the Kingdom: but on the side
towards Germany and the Netherlands, it lies somewhat
open: For out of the Netherlands, Paris it self has
often been hard put to it. And this is the reason why
the French have been so eager in getting a good part
of these into their Possession, in which they have been
successfull in the last War, and thereby have mightily
strengthened their Frontiers: and for the same reason,
they have made themselves Masters of Lorrain, to fortify
themselves on the side of Germany; and by degrees
to become Masters of the Rhine, the ancient
boundary of Gaul, which seems the only thing wanting
to the Perfection of France. Next to this, France
may be one of the most happy and most fruitfull
Countries,Its Fertility. not only for the equal Temperature of its
Climate betwixt an immoderate Heat and an excessive
Cold; but also, because it produces every thing, which
seems to be requisite for the sustenance and Conveniency
of Mankind; so that scarce a spot of Ground is
to be found in France, but what produces something
or other for the benefit of Man. And its Product is
not only sufficient for its Inhabitants, but also plentifull
enough to be exported into foreign parts. The
Commodities exported out of France, are chiefly;
Wine, Brandy, Vinegar, salt, innumerable sorts of
silk, and Woollen stuffs, and Manufactures, Hemp,
Canvas, Linen, Paper, Glass, saffran, Almonds, Olives,
Capers, Prunello's, Chesnuts, soap, and the like. 
Yet in Normandy and Picardy, grow no Vines, but
the common people drink Cyder. scarce any Metals
are to be found in France, and not Gold or silver
Mines. But this want is supplied by the ingenuity of
the French, and the folly of Foreigners. For the
French Commodities have drawn Fleets of their Money
into France, especially since Henry IV. set up the silk
Manufactury there. There are some who have computed

that France sells stuffs A-la-mode yearly to Foreigners
only, to the value of 40 millions of Livres,
Wine 15 millions, Brandy 5 millions, salt 10, and so
proportionably of other Commodities. Mr. Forcy an
Englishman, says, that about the year 1669, the Commodities
which were brought from France into England
exceeded what were carried from England to France,
in value 1600000 lib. sterl. And it is notorious that by
help of such Commodities as they send into spain, they
get a great part of their West-India Plate-Fleet. Yet
Navigation does not flourish so much in France as it
might. The reason seems to be, that the French Nation
is not so much addicted to the sea, and that other
Nations have been before-hand with them in the
East and West-Indies. Which is the reason, that the
King, tho' he has above 100 Capital ships, yet cannot
set out so great a Fleet hitherto, as the English and
Dutch, as some think, wanting able seamen. For it
is not sufficient to Man out a Fleet once, but in time
of War, Recruits must also be had. Nevertheless it
may be this King will first settle his Maritime Affairs,
and afterwards take his opportunity to surprize his
Neighbours. Its Plantations. 
         France has very few Plantations abroad,
except what is in the Caribby Islands, the Isles called
Tartuges, and on the North-side of Hispaniola. They
apply themselves also to fishing upon the great sand
Bank before Newfoundland, and catch in Canada and
New France good store of Bevers. They have set several
Projects on foot for the East-India Trade, but
without any great success hitherto, the Dutch, who
are so powerfull there, opposing them with all their
might. Lastly the great strength of France may be
judged of by this, that the Revenue of the Clergy,
which is possessed of two fifth parts, as 'tis said, of the
Kingdom, amounts to 104 millions and 500000
Crowns yearly. The King's Revenues are computed
to amount now to 150 millions of Livres, whereas in
the last Age it did not amount to above 9 or 10 millions. 
At the time of Henry IV. to 16 millions, and in
the year 1639 to 77 millions; which vast difference is
in part to be ascribed to the different value of Money
since those times, and the great Taxes which are imposed

upon the subjects: but without question the
chief reason is, that France since that time has found
out new ways to draw Money out of other Countries. §. 27. As to the Form of Government of France,
         The Government of France. 
         
it is to be observed, That anciently there were very potent
Dukes, Earls and Lords in France, who, tho' they
were Vassals of the King, yet they used to pay no further
Obedience to him, than was consistent with their
own Interest, except the Kings were in a Condition to
oblige them to it: But all these in process of Time
were extinguished, and their Countries united to the
Crown. Now-a-days the Dukes and Earls in France
are nothing else but bare Titles annexed to some considerable
Estate without any sovereignty or Jurisdiction. 
And whereas formerly certain Countries used to
be assigned to the King's sons, whereof they bore the
Title, now-a-days only a certain yearly Revenue is
allotted them, with the Title of a certain Dukedom
or County, wherein perhaps they have not a Foot of
Ground. And after the ancient sovereign Dukedoms
and Earldoms were abolished, some of the great Men
of the Kingdom had taken upon themselves great Authority
in the Kingdom, but by the Policy of Richlieu
and Mararini they were reduced to such a Condition,
that they dare not utter a Word against the King. The
Assembly of the Estates (there being three of them,
viz. The Clergy, Nobility, and the Citizens, they
making up the third Estate) were also formerly in
great Veneration, whereby the King's Power was
much limited. But they having not been convened
since the Year 1614, their Authority is quite suppressed. 
Those of the Reformed Religion did prove also very
troublesome to the Kings of France as long as they
were in a Condition to take up Arms, but with the
loss of Rochelle they lost the Power of giving their
Kings any Disturbance for the future. And tho' the
King hitherto does not force their Consciences, yet he
draws off a great many from that Party, by hopes of
his Royal Favour and Preferments. Heretofore the
Parliament of Paris used to oppose the King's Designs,

under pretence, that it had a right, that the King
could not do any thing of great moment without its
consent; but this King hath taught it only to intermeddle
with Judicial Business, and some other Concerns,
which the King now and then is pleased to leave
to its Decision. The Gallick Church also boasts of a
particular Prerogative in regard of the Court of Rome,
she always having disputed with the Pope some part
of his Authority over her; and the King has the Nomination
of the Bishops and Abbots, all which contributes
much to the strength and Increase of this
Kingdom, if a wise and good King sits upon the
Throne. §. 28. The strength of France with reguard to England. 
          When we duely weigh the Power of France
in comparison with its Neighbours, it is easily perceived,
that there is not any state in Christendom
which France doth not equal if not exceed in Power:
'Tis true, in former Ages the English reduced the French,
but at that time they were possessed of a great part of
it themselves; there were then several Demi-sovereign
Princes; the French Infantry was then inconsiderable,
and the English Bows were terrible to them:
All which is quite otherwise now, and the English Landforces
are now not to be compared with the French
neither in Number nor Goodness, since the English are
unexercised, and their Civil Wars have rather been
carried on by Armies raised on a sudden, than well disciplined
Troops, and these Wars have not a little
weakened this Nation. On the other hand, the English
have chiefly applied themselves to sea Affairs, and
in this the French cannot hitherto be compared with
the English; yet England can scarce reap any great
Advantages from France at sea. For, suppose they
should beat the French Fleet, yet they would scarce
venture to make a Descent upon France, as having
not any footing there; and the French Privateers
would certainly do great mischief to them. But if
the English should once miscarry at sea, an that the
French should once get footing in England, it might
perhaps prove fatal to that Kingdom, since the fate
of the War must be then decided by the Issue of one

Battel, England having no Inland strong Holds. In
the last Age spain proved very troublesome to France,
         To spain. 
the French scarce being able to defend themselves against
it, and having several times been obliged to
make Peace upon disadvantageous Conditions: But
besides, that at that time the French Infantry was
good for little, and the spanish Nation was then at its
heighth, whereas now the spanish Nobility is more for
Debauchery, Gaming, and such like Intrigues, than for
acquiring Glory in War; they were then in full possession
of all the Netherlands, and Charles V. had a great
Advantage by being Emperour. But now-a-days the
Netherlands are miserably torn to pieces, they being
scarce able to Garrison the places that remain. Naples
and Milan are almost in the same condition; and
France may easily secure the Coast of Provence against
the spaniards, who may be well satisfied if the French
don't by the way of Roussilion, Navarre, or Bayonne
enter spain. 
         To Italy. 
         Italy is neither willing nor powerfull enough
to hurt France, but these Princes are well satisfied
if France does not pass the Alpes and disturb
their Repose. To Holland. The French are not powerfull enough
for the Dutch at sea, if they have an Opportunity to
make use of all their Naval strength, yet the French
Privateers may do them considerable Mischief, wherefore
I cannot see what benefit Holland can reap from
a War with France without an absolute necessity:
For the Dutch Land-forces gathered out of all Nations,
are not likely to do any great Feats against it. 
The swiss also neither can nor will hurt France,
         To the swiss. 
          they
being well satisfied if they can get Money: Wherefore
the French need not fear any thing from them, except
they should make them desperate, when in Confederacy
with others they might prove very troublesome. 
Germany seems to be the only Country,To Germany. which alone
might be able to balance France; for, if these Princes
were well united, they are able to bring more numerous
Armies into the Field, and that in no ways inferiour
in Goodness to the French; and perhaps they
might be able to hold it out with France. But considering
the present state of Germany, it seems next to
an impossibility, that all the Members of the Empire

should unanimously and resolutely engage themselves
in a long War, and prosecute the same with Vigour:
For it is not to be imagined, that all of them should
have an equal Interest in the War, and some of them
must expect to be ruined, tho' the War in the main
should prove successfull; but if it should succeed otherwise,
they must be great losers by it without reprieve. §. 29. But if it should be supposed,The strength of France in regard of a Confederacy. that France
may be attacked by a great many at once; it is to be
considered, that it is absolutely against the Interest of
some states, to join themselves against France. For,
as Affairs now stand, Portugal is not likely to join
with spain, sweden with Denmark, Poland with the
House of Austria, against France. Neither is it probable
that the Italian Princes will be desirous to assist
the Emperour and spain in subduing of France, except
we must suppose them to be willing to promote
their own Ruin. Neither is it likely that England
and Holland will agree in a War against France, for
whilst one of them is engaged in a War against France,
it seems to be the Interest of the other to stand Neuter,
and to promote its own Trade and Navigation. It is
also not very probable, that the Princes of Germany,
especially those of the Protestant Religion, should be
willing to see France fall before the House of Austria;
since both their Power and Religion would stand upon
slippery Ground, if not supported by a Foreign
Power. Wherefore it seems to be no difficult task to
persuade some of the Protestant Princes, at least, to
sit still. The swiss also are not likely to co-operate
with spain and the House of Austria in the Conquest
of France, and therefore it would not be so difficult
for France to defend it self against the House of Austria
and all its Confederates. Not to mention here,
that in such a case, sweden and Poland would not leave
France, if they were in a Condition to assist it. But
it is not probable, that France should make any account
upon an Alliance with the Turks, except in the
greatest Extremity; for the Mahometan Princes have
learned by Experience, that where-ever they have intermedled

with the Christians in their Wars, these
commonly have clapt up a Peace, without including
them, or having any regard to their Interest. On the
other hand, France seems not to be strong enough to
overturn all the states of Europe by his Conquests:
For France may be the most potent Kingdom in
Christendom, but not the only one; and by extending
its Conquests too far it would be weakened within:
In the mean time, those lesser states bordering upon
France are in great danger to be devoured by so
flourishing a Kingdom. "
"11","CHAP VI. Of the United Provinces. §. 1. The ancient state of the United Provinces. 
          THat Country which is commonly called the Netherlands
or the Lower Germany, was anciently
comprehended, partly under Gaul, partly under
Germany, according as they were situated either on
this or the other side of the Rhine, which was the ancient
Boundary of these two vast Countries. That
part which was situated on this side of the Rhine, was
by Julius Caesar, together with the rest of Gaul, reduced
under the Obedience of the Roman Empire. 
Afterwards the Batavi and the Zealanders did also
submit to the Romans, yet so, that they were rather
esteemed Allies than subjects. And when in the
Fifth Century, after the Birth of Christ, the Francks
established a new Kingdom in France, these Provinces
were also at first united to it: But at the same time
when Germany was separated from France, most of
them fell to Germany, few remaining with France. The
Governours of these Provinces did, in process of time,
under the Names of Dukes and Earls, make themselves
Demi-sovereigns, as did also other Princes of
Germany and France; yet so, that it was a general
Maxim among them, To rule the People with Mildness. 
And for the security of their Liberty, they used

to grant them great Privileges, in the maintaining of
which this Nation was always very forward. The Estates
also, which consisted of the Clergy, Nobility,
and Cities, were always in great Authority, and would
not easily suffer that any new Impositions should be
laid upon the People without their consent. The Division of the 17 Provinces. 
          These
Provinces, according to the common computation,
are seventeen in number: viz. Four Dukedoms of
Brabant, Limburgh, Luxemburgh, and Gueldres: seven
Earldoms of Flanders, Artois, Hainault, Holland,
Zealand, Namur and Zutphen: Five Lordships of
Friesland, Malines, Ʋtrecht, Over-yssel and Groningen. 
Antwerp has the title of a Marquisate of the Roman Empire. 
These Provinces were anciently ruled each by
its Prince or Lord; but afterwards several of them
were either by Inheritance, Marriages, or Contracts
united together, till most of them fell to the share of
the House of Burgundy, from whence they came to the
House of Austria by the Marriage of Maximilian I. 
who had married Mary the only Daughter of Charles
surnamed The Hardy. 
         The Ʋnion of the 17 Provinces. 
          And were afterwards all united
under Charles V. who governed them in Peace and
Prosperity. 'Tis related, that he had once taken a Resolution
to make them one Kingdom, which however
he could not effect, their Laws and Privileges being so
different, and they so jealous of one another, that none
of them would remit any thing of their Pretences in
favour of the rest. But the Reign of Charles V. over
the Netherlands, proved so very fortunate, because he
bore an extraordinary Affection to them, and they to
him:T•eir Co•diti•n than under Charles V. For Charles was born in Ghent, educated amongst
them, and lived a considerable time there. His
Humour suited very well with theirs, he conversed with
them in a friendly manner without haughtiness, employing
the Netherlanders frequently in his Affairs,
whereby this Nation was in great esteem at his Court. 
But under the Reign of his son Philip II. these Provinces
were torn to Pieces by intestine Commotions
and civil Wars, which occasioned the Rise of a potent
Commonwealth in Europe. This Government having
proved the occasion of great Alterations, it is
worth our while to search both into the cause of these

Commotions and the Origin of this new Government. §. 2. The cause of the Wars in the Netherlands under Philip II. 
          
         Philip II. therefore was not a little to be
blamed, as being partly himself the cause of these civil
Troubles; for he being born in spain, and educated
after the spanish Fashion, did favour only the spainards,
representing in all his Behaviour a perfect haughty
spaniard; which did mightily alienate the Minds
of the Netherlanders, especially after he resided altogether
in spain, and did not so much as honour the
Netherlands with his Presence; thinking it perhaps
below his Grandeur, that he who was Master of so great
a Kingdom, and had such great Projects in his Head,
should trouble himself much about the Affairs of the
Netherlanders. Tho' in all Probability these might
have been kept in Obedience by his Presence; for his
Father, the sooner to appease a Tumult which was
only risen in the City of Ghent, did venture to take
his journey through France, and the Territories of
Francis,
         William Prince of Orange. who was but lately reconciled to him. Moreover,
William, Prince of Orange, a crafty, thoroughpaced,
and ambitious Man, did not a little foment these
Divisions. For when Philip had taken a Resolution
to go into spain, and to commit the Administration
of the Netherlands to a Governour, this Prince was
contriving how Christina, Dutchess of Lorrain, might
be constituted Regent of the Netherlands, and how
he, by marrying her Daughter, might bear the greatest
sway in the Government: But he miscarrying in
both, because Philip constituted Margaret of Parma,
natural Daughter of Charles V. Regent of the Netherlands,
and refused to give his consent to the Match,
was so dissatisfied thereat, that by doing of Mischief, he
resolved to show his own strength. Discontents of the Nobility and Clergy. The Earls of Egmont
and Hoorn were also very much dissatisfied, as also
a great many others, who being in great esteem
with the People, were all very jealous of the spaniards. 
A great many also of the Nobility were for a Change,
partly out of a hatred to the spaniards, partly because
they were naturally of a turbulent spirit, and were
become poor and over Head and Ears in Debt, as having

endeavoured to outvie the spaniards in splendour
at Court, and thereby spent more than their Incomes
would allow of. The Clergy besides this, was somewhat
discontented, because Philip, having created several
new Episcopal sees, would have emploied the Revenues
of several Abbies for the Maintenance of them,
which did not only dissatisfie such as were in present
Possession of these Abbies, but others also, who were in
hopes of them for the future: for the Abbots were chosen
by a free Election of the Monks in each Monastery,
but the Bishops were nominated by the King. Change of Religion. But all
this could not have furnished sufficient Fuel for so great
a Flame, if Religion had not been joyned to them,
which proves most efficacious in disturbing the Minds
of the Common People, and always serves for a specious
Pretence to such as are for alterations in a state. 
There were great numbers in the Netherlands, who
had relinquished the Roman Catholick Religion, some
of them professing the Augsburgh Confession, some
the Doctrine of the Huguenots, others fell into the
Errors of the Anabaptists. Charles V. had by severe
Proclamations and Punishments been very hard upon
them, which had served for nothing else than to exasperate
the Minds of the People, and to promote the
new Religion. Wherefore it was the Opinion of Mary
Queen of Hungary, the sister of Charles V. and
then Regent of the Netherlands, That they ought rather
to be treated more mildly: But Philip had taken
a Resolution to root out by force this Heresie, either
out of a Zeal for the Roman Catholick Religion, or
because he hoped thereby to oblige the Pope, whose
Favour he stood in need of at that time. He renewed
therefore his Father's Proclamation, and that with
more severity against these Hereticks; and to put
them in Execution, he was for setting up a Court of
Judicature,spanish Inquisition. 
          according to the Model of the spanish Inquisition;
the very Name of which was terrible to
every body: And in effect, this Inquisition is a very
cruel Constitution, whereby the Life, Estate, and
good Name of every subject is put into the Hands of
unmercifull Priests, whose chief Glory is to be Inhuman
and Rigorous in their proceedings; and who
have a power to take up and punish any person upon

suspicion only; and tho' a Man is wrongfully accused,
he is not to know either his Accuser or Crime, and tho'
he makes his Innocence appear, yet he seldom escapes
without some punishment. The Netherlanders were
the more frightned, not only because in this Court,
no Privileges, no Favour of the King, nor Intercessions,
did avail; but also, because they knew the Netherlanders
to be free in their speech, carrying, as it were,
their Hearts upon their Tongues, and that by way of
Trade they were obliged to be conversant with those
of other Religions. Whereas on the other hand, it
was natural and easie for an Italian or spaniard to
keep his Thoughts within himself. some are of Opinion,
That the spaniards were glad to see that the
Netherlanders did begin the Fray, hoping thereby to
get an Opportunity to force them to Obedience, and
by suppressing their Liberty and Privileges to rule
over them at pleasure. They hoped that this Country
might serve them one day for a Magazine, from
whence they might conveniently attack France, England,
and the Northern Kingdoms. Yet it is also
most certain, that some foreign Princes did administer
Fuel to nourish and augment the Flame; especially
Elizabeth Queen of England, whose Intention
was,Queen Flizabeth 
           ••mented their Revolt. by this means to cut out so much Work for the
spaniard, that he might not be at leisure to think of
Conquering others, his great Power being at that time
become terrible to all Europe. 
        §. 3. Thus the seeds of Civil Commotions were
sown in the Minds of the Netherlanders, about which
time Philip II. 1559. went into spain; having so constituted
the Government, that the supream Administration
of Affairs should be in the Hands of the Regent
and the Council of state, of which Council, besides
the Prince of Orange, were the Earl of Egmont and
others,The Cardinal Granville. 
          the Cardinal Granville, a Burgundian, a wise
Man, and much relied on by the King, who had given
secret Instructions to the Regent to rule according
to his Advice: But the Netherlandish Lords quickly
perceiving, that the whole Government was managed
according to the Counsels of the Cardinal, did sufficiently
shew their Discontent in opposing themselves against

it; especially when the Cardinal pressed hard to
execute the King's Commands concerning the Establishment
of the Bishops, and rooting out of the new
Religion; the Netherlandish Lords advised a Toleration
of the same, and to deal more gently with the
People. This raised a general Hatred against the Cardinal,
whereupon the Prince of Orange, and the Earls
of Egmont and Hoorn writ to the King, That if he
was not removed, it would be impossible to preserve the
Peace of the Netherlands; neither did they rest stisfied
till Philip did consent to their Demands: But
because the Regent was,1564. after the removal of the Cardinal,
swaied by the President Vigilius and the Earl
of Barlemont, who in every respect followed the footsteps
of the Cardinal, this Joy did not last long, but
the old Discontents being renewed, it was said, That
the Body of the Cardinal was removed from the Council,
but his spirit remained in it. Thus the Divisions continued
in the Council of state, nor could the Proclamations
against the new Religion be put in Execution,
because the People began more and more to oppose
them. Count Egmont sent into spain. 
          It was therefore with consent of the Regent
and senate agreed upon, to send the Earl of Egmont
into spain, who was to give an account to the
King, of the whole state of Affairs, and to see whether
the King could find out another Remedy. The
King received him very courteously as to his person,
but would not remit any thing from his severity as to
Religion. And imagining that the cause why this
Evil had taken so deep root, was the Mildness of the
Regent, he caused his Proclamation to be renewed, commanding
withall, That the Counsel of Trent should
be introduced in the Netherlands. Besides these severities
a Rumour was spread abroad, That Philip had
agreed with Charles IX. at Bayonne, by all Means and
Ways to root out the Hereticks, which was the cause
why it was resolved to oppose the King's Intentions. 
some of the Nobility made the first beginning,An Association of the Nobility. who
entered into an Association (which they called the Compromise)
whereby they engaged themselves, to oppose
the Inquisition, and to stand by one another, if any
one should be molested for his Religion; but solemnly
protested, That they had no other Aim by so doing,

but the Glory of God, the Grandeur of the King,
and the Peace of their native Country. This Association
was drawn up by Philip Marnix Lord of Aldegonde,
and subscribed by 400 Persons of Quality, among
whom the chiefest were Henry of Brederode,
Lewis Earl of Nassau, Brother of the Prince of Orange,
the Earls of Culenburgh and Bergh. These
met at Brussels,
         1566. and delivered a Petition to the Regent,
wherein they desired, That the Proclamations
issued forth touching Religion might be annulled. 
The Regent answered them in courteous but general
terms, telling them, That she would know the King's
Pleasure in the Matter. 'Tis said, That the Earl of
Barlemont, who stood then near the Regent, did tell
her, That they were no ways to be feared, because they
were only Geusen or Beggars; which has rendered the
Name of the Geusen very famous afterwards, they having
had a Beggars Pouch the Coat of Arms of that
Confederacy. In the mean while abundance of Pamphlets
were spread abroad, which did more and more
exasperate the People. And because Philip had given
but a very indifferent Reception to those Deputies,
which were sent into spain, to pray for a Mitigation
of these Proclamations, and had refused to comply in
the least with the sentiments of the People, it came
to an open Insurrection. so that the new Religion
was not only publickly professed and taught in a great
concourse of People, but the Rabble also fell to plundering
of Churches and pulling down of Images. Breaking of Im•ges. 
And tho' the Prince of Orange and the Earl of Egmont,
did what they could to appease this Tumult,
yet had the King conceived a shrewd suspicion as if
they had been in the bottom of it; wherefore they
were consulting their own safety, but could, as yet,
not come to any Resolution. In the mean time, the
Regent having raised some Troops, and endeavoured
either by Fear or fair Words, or any other ways to
reduce the dissatisfied Party to Obedience, some of
whom did by submission and other services endeavour
to be reconciled to the King. And this Design
succeeded so well, that without any great trouble and
the punishment of a very few, the Country was restored
to its Tranquility: Nevertheless, because it was

rumoured abroad, that a great Army was marching
out of spain against them, a great many of the Inhabitants,
and especially of the Handycrafts Trade, did
retire into the neighbouring Countries. The Prince
of Orange himself disliking this calm retired into Germany. 
        §. 4. It was then the Advice of the Regent, that
the King should come in person, without any great
Force, into the Netherlands, and by his Presence and
Clemency endeavour entirely to heal the ulcerated
Minds of the People. But he followed the Advice of
the Duke of Alva,
         The Duke of Alva. 
          who advised to make use of this
Opportunity to bring the Netherlands under the
Yoak, and to strike Terrour into the rest. he
marched with a brave Army through savoy and Burgundy
into the Netherlands,
         1568. and having immediately
taken into Custody the Earls of Egmont and Hoorn,
whom he pretended to have been underhand the Authors
of these Troubles, declared all those guilty of
High Treason that had had any hand in the Association,
the Petition, and pulling down of the Images. 
And a Court was erected of twelve Judges, from
which no Appeal was to be allowed, where Judgment
was to be given concerning these Matters, this Court
was commonly called The bloody Council. Before this
Court, the Prince of Orange and some other Lords,
who were fled, were summoned to appear, and upon
non-appearance they were declared guilty of High
Treason, and their Estates Confiscated. The same severity
was used against others of less note. This caused
such a Terror among the Inhabitants, that they left
their Habitations in Troops. He caused also Citadels
to be built in several great Cities, among which one
of the chiefest was that of Antwerp. In the mean
time the Prince of Orange had brought together considerable
Forces in Germany, some of which, under the
Command of Lewis his Brother, falling into Friesland,
beat the Count of Arembergh, the Governour of
that Province. The Earls of Egmont and Hoorn beheaded. But soon after the Duke of Alva, having
first caused the Earls of Egmont and Hoorn to be
beheaded, marched against him in person. Not long
after the Prince of Orange fell with a great Army into

         Brabant, but was beaten back by the Duke of Alva,
and his Forces dispersed. The Duke of Alva, puffed
up with this great success, did not only cause a most
magnificent statue to be erected at Antw•rp; but having
also formed a Design to conquer the Netherlands
with their own Money, he imposed a Tax upon them,
of the hundredth Penny, to be paid of the whole value
of all Estates; and besides this, the twentieth Penny
to be paid of all Moveables, but the tenth of all
Immoveables, as often as they were sold. This did
exasperate the Netherlanders to the utmost degree. 
And whilst the Duke of Alva, being in great want of
Money, was busie in squeezing out these Taxes, and
was upon the point of forcing the Inhabitants of
Brussels, who refused to pay it, News was brought,
That the banished Netherlanders, who were turned
Privateers, and had about 24 ships of indifferent
strength, had under the Conduct of the Earl of March
taken the City of Briel in Holland. 
         Briel taken, April 1. 1571. Then most Cities
of Holland, out of a Hatred to the spaniards, and the
tenth Penny, revolted from the spaniards, except
Amsterdam and schonhoven, which remained for some
time under the Obedience of spain. It was a grand
mistake in the Duke of Alva, that during his Regency
of four Years, he had not secured the sea Coasts. 
The revolted Places chose for their Governour the
Prince of Orange, swearing to him Allegiance as the
King's stadtholder, as if they had only revolted from
the Duke of Alva and not the King. A great many
Privateers then joined from France and England, who
within the space of four Months made up a Fleet of
150 ships, who had their Rendezvouz at Flushing,
and afterwards did great Mischiefs to the spaniards. 
The Duke of Alva was not in a condition to resist this
storm, because the Earl of Bergh had not only at the
same time taken a great many places in Gueldres,
Friesland and Over-yssel, but also Lewis Earl of Nassaw,
had with the Assistance of the French, surprised Mons:
Which City the Duke of Alva endeavoured to recover
by force of Arms, and the Prince of Orange, who with
an Army newly raised in Germany, had made prodigious
havock in Brabant, had in vain endeavoured to
relieve it, was retired into Holland. Wherefore this

City was surrendered upon Articles to the Duke of Alva. 
He then tried all ways to reduce the revolted
places to Obedience by force, having among others,
pillaged Malines and Zutphen, quite destroied Naerden,
and taken Haerlem after a tedious siege, the Inhabitants
of which City were most barbarously treated. §. 5. The Affairs of the spaniards in the Netherlands
being by the rigorous proceedings of the Duke of
Alva (who used to bragg, that during his Regency of
six Years he had caused 18000 to be executed by the
Hangman) put into Confusion,Duke of Alva recalled. he was recalled in the
Year 1573. Lewis Requesenes succeeded him, a Man
of somewhat a milder Temper,Lewis Requesenes Governour. 
          but who had a very
ill beginning of his Regency, the Fleet which he had
sent out to relieve Middleburgh being destroied before
his Eyes, and the City surrendered to the Prince of Orange:
Yet the Prince also received a great Blow; for
his Brother Lewis, who led an Army to his Assistance
out of Germany, was routed near Grave upon the
Mockerhyde, where he and his Brother Henry were
slain in the Field. After this Victory the spanish souldiers
mutinied for want of Pay, and lived upon free
Quarters in Antwerp till all was paid. Then the siege
of Leyden was undertaken, which was reduced to the
utmost extremity by Famine, till a Dyke of the
Maese was cut through, by which means, and the
help of a North West Wind at spring tide, the Country
round about being put under Water, the spaniards,
after a great loss sustained, were forced to leave it. 
In the Year next following the Emperour endeavoured
by his Mediation to compose these Troubles,1574. 
and a Meeting was held for that purpose betwixt the
Deputies of both Parties at Breda, which proved
fruitless. Then the spaniards took Ziricuzea after a
siege of nine Months; but before the place was taken
Lewis Requesenes died. 1576. After his Death the Council
of state took the Administration of the Government
into their Hands, which was approved by the
King. §. 6. In the mean time the Hatred of the Netherlanders
against the spaniards was more and more encreased,

especially after the souldiers, who were
grown mutinous for want of Pay, and had committed
great Outrages, that the Council of state had declared
them Enemies, giving leave to the Inhabitants
to take up Arms against them. During which Disturbances
Maestricht and Antwerp were plundered:
Which disposed the rest,The Treaty of Ghent. 
          to enter upon a Treaty with
the Prince of Orange at Ghent, which contained, That
the Provinces had made a Peace betwixt themselves,
That the Proclamations issued forth during the Regency
of the Duke of Alva should be annulled, and
the spaniards sent out of the Country: Which Contract,
tho' it was ratified by the King, yet he had
taken a Resolution quickly to disunite them again. 
For this purpose he constituted Don John d' Austria,
         Don John d' Austria made Governour,
         
his natural Brother, Governour of the Netherlands,
The Prince of Orange forewarned the Netherlanders,
That he ought not to be trusted; notwithstanding
this, he was received by plurality of Voices, they having
obliged him to subscribe the Contract made at
Ghent, and to send away the spanish souldiers. But
the Prince of Orange and the Provinces of Holland
and Zealand were not well satisfied with this Agreement,
and the rest also quickly began to mistrust him. 
He gave them sufficient occasion to believe that their
Jealousie was not ill grounded, when he by surprize
made himself Master of the Castle of Namur, under
pretence to secure his person against any Attempts,
which so disturbed the Netherlanders, that they took
up Arms to drive him out of Namur, They also
took all the strong Holds, where any German Garrison
was left, and demolished the Castles. And sending
for the Prince of Orange to come to Brussels,
they constituted him Grand Bayliff of Brabant. 
This encrease of the House of Orange made some
great Men envious, who made a Party to balance it;
among whom, one of the chiefest was the Duke of
Arshot. 
         Archduke Matthew. These called in Matthew, Archduke of Austria,
whom they made Governour of the Netherlands,
who coming with all speed was also received by
the Party of the Prince of Orange, under condition
that the Prince should be his Lieutenant, and he not
do any thing without the consent of the Estates. 1577. On

the other hand,Alexander Duke of Parma. 
         Alexander Duke of Parma came with
an Army out of Italy to the Assistance of Don John
d' Austria, who bringing with him a good number of
old spanish Troops, beat the Army of the Estates
near Gemblours, and took Louvain, Philipville, Limbourgh,
and several other places. The Estates then
finding themselves alone not strong enough, offered
to put themselves under the Protection of Henry III. 
King of France, and he having refused to accept it,
the same offer was made to the Duke of Alenson his
Brother, who having accepted of it, came into the
Netherlands: But could do nothing of moment, the
Provinces and great Men being so divided among
themselves, that no body knew who was Master. 
There arose also a new Division among the Estates,
when upon Request of those of the Reformed Religion,
Liberty of Conscience was allowed in the Netherlands;
which was willingly consented to by those of
Ghent and others; but Artois, Haynault, and some other
Wallooon Cities, that were very zealous for the
Catholick Religion, did oppose it with great violence;
and having by degrees separated themselves from the
rest, set up a new Faction, who were called the Malecontents. 
During these Troubles Don John d' Austria
died,Malecontents leaving the Government to the Duke of Parma,
who was confirmed in his place by Philip. 
         The Duke of Parma. 
         
He began his Regency with the taking of Maestricht,
and bringing over the Wallon Provinces, viz. Artois,
Haynault, and the Walloon Flanders, to the King's
Party by accord. §. 7. The Prince of Orange therefore perceiving that
the Contract of Ghent was quite broke,The Ʋnion of Utrecht the Foundation of the Commonwealth. and that the
Great Men who envied one another, and the several
Provinces, that were of a different Religion, were
scarce ever to be United: And yet being desirous to
secure himself, and to establish the Protestant Religion,
he got the Estates of the Provinces of Gueldres,
         1579. 
         Holland,
Zealand, Friesland and Ʋtrecht, to meet. Here
it was agreed, that they would defend one another as
one Body; that they would consult concerning Peace
and War, Taxes, and the like, with common Consent;
and that they would maintain Liberty of Conscience. 

This Union, made at Ʋtrecht, (wherein also
afterwards Over-Yssel and Groningen were included)
is the Foundation of the commonwealth of the United
Netherlands. At that time their Affairs were in
so low a Condition, that they coined a Medal, wherein
their state was represented by a ship without sails,
or Rudder, left to the Mercy of the Waves, with this
Inscription, Incertum quo fata ferant. The Fortune
of the Prince of Orange absolutely depending now on
this Union, he made it his business to hinder the Conclusion
of the Treaty of a general Peace, which by the
Mediation of the Emperour was set on foot at Collen,
because a general Peace might easily have dissolved this
Union. And, because the Affairs of the Netherlands
grew worse and worse every day, the spaniards having
taken one after another, the Cities of Bois le Duc,
Breda, Tournay, Valenciennes, Malines, and Others,
and a great many of the Great Men being gone over
to the spanish Party: The Prince of Orange on the
other hand being well assured, that the spaniards one
time or another would revenge themselves upon him
and his friends; and finding himself not in a capacity
to maintain the Cause against them, he persuaded the
Estates of the Netherlands that they should renounce
all Obedience to Philip, who had violated their Privileges
confirmed to them by Oath, and make the Duke
of Alenson their soveraign, with whom he had underhand
made an agreement, That the United Provinces
should fall to his share. And the Estates of Holland,
Zealand and Ʋtrecht, were then for making him their
soveraign, except the Cities of Amsterdam and Gouda;
and questionless it would have been done afterwards,
if his unexspected Death had not prevented it. §. 8. The Duke of Alenson. 
          The Duke of Alenson having obtained the
soveraignty, raised the siege of Cambray, which was
besieged by the spaniards, and in the year next following
was at Antwerp proclaimed Duke of Brabant, and
at Ghent Earl of Flanders. But his Power being confined
within very narrow Bounds by the Estates, he,
by the advice of his Friends, resolved to make himself
Absolute. He proposed to the Estates, That if he should
die without Issue, these Countries might be United

with the Crown of France; which being denied him,
he took a strange Resolution; viz. By surprize to make
himself absolute Master of Antwerp, and some other
Cities. For this purpose several Thousands of French
were already got privately into Antwerp, which were
beaten out by the Citizens with considerable Loss. 
They made the like Attempts upon several other Places
on the same day, which every-where miscarried,
except at Dendermond, Dunkirk, and Dixmuide. And
thus the French having lost at once all their credit, and
the affection of the Netherlanders, the Duke of Alenson,
full of shame and confusion, returned into France,
where he died soon after. The French intermedling
with the Affairs of the Netherlands, had drawn with
it another Evil; which was, That Foreign souldiers
were again brought into the Netherlands, which was
against the Agreement made with the Walloons, Then
the Duke of Parma re-took Dunkirk,
         1583. 
         Newport, Winoxbergen,
Menin, Alost, and some other Places in
Flanders. 
         1584. 
         Ypres and Bruges did also submit. And in
the same Year the Affairs of the Estates received a great
Blow by the Death of William Prince of Orange, who
was stabbed in his Palace at Delft by a Burgundian,
whose Name was Balthasar Gerhard. 
         Prince of Orange murthered. By whose Death
the Netherlands being without a Head, were left in
great confusion. §. 9. After the Death of Prince William, the Estates
did make Maurice,
         His son Prince Maurice made stadtholider. son of the deceased, stadtholder
of Holland, Zealand, and Ʋtrecht; and he being but
eighteen Years of Age, they constituted the Earl of
Hohenloe his Lieutenant. But the soveraignty they
proffered to the King of France, who being at that
time distracted with intestine Wars, was not at leisure
to accept of it. The Duke of Parma in the mean
while taking advantage of this juncture of Affairs, reduced
Antwerp by Famine within a Twelve month's
time; as also Dendermond, Ghent, Brussels, Malines
and Nimeguen by Force. After the Loss of Antwerp,
the Estates, who were for submitting Themselves to
any body but the spaniards,
         The English Confederacy. offered the soveraignty
over them to Queen Elizabeth, which she refused to
accept of: Yet she entred with them into a more strict

Alliance, by virtue of which she obliged her self to
maintain a certain number of souldiers at her own
Charge in the Netherlands, which, with all the other
Forces of the Estates, were to be Commanded by an
English General. And the Estates did surrender to
the Queen, as a security for the Charges she was to be
at, the Cities of Flushing, Briel and Rammakens, or sceburgh
upon Walchorn, which were afterwards restored
to the Estates for the summ of One Million of Crowns. 1616. 
The Queen sent Robert Dudley,
         1586. Earl of Leicester, as
General into Holland;
         The Regency of the Earl of Leicester. 
          who being arrived there, was
made by the Estates their Governour-General, and
that with a greater Power then was acceptable to the
Queen; but he did no great Feats. For the Duke of Parma
not only took Grave and Venlo, and forced him from
before Zutphen; but he also administered the publick
Affairs at a strange rate, to the great dissatisfaction of
the Estates, to whom he had rendred himself suspected. 
Their Discontents were much augmented, after William
stanley, who was by the Earl of Leicester made
Commander in Chief in Deventer, had betraied that
City to the spaniards. The Year next following, the
Earl of Leicester attempted the Relief of sluce in
Flanders, but to no purpose; and being returned into
Holland, where he by several suspicious Undertakings
augmented the Differences betwixt him and the
Estates, he returned very ill satisfied into England;
where, by Command of the Queen, he resigned his
Office of Governour. §. 10. The state of Affairs in Holland legias to mend. Hitherto the Affairs of the United Netherlands
(whom henceforward we will call Hollanders)
had been in a very ill Condition; but from this time
forwards they began to mend a-pace, and became more
settled. This was partly occasioned by the Ruin of the
two Provinces of Brabant and Flanders, which were
reconciled to the King, upon condition, That such as
would not profess themselves Roman Catholicks, should
leave the Country within a prefixed time: A great
many of these flocking into Holland, made its Cities
very populous. Especially all the Traffick of Antwerp
was transplanted to Amsterdam, which rendred
that City very Rich and Potent at sea. Besides this

         Philip, like those, who will hunt two Hares with one
Dog,1588. did not only attempt to Invade England with
a great Fleet, but also sent in the Year next following
the Duke of Parma with an Army to the Assistance
of the League in France; both which proving fruitless,
the Hollanders had in the mean while leisure given
them, to put themselves into a good posture. 
Whereas the Duke of Parma had wisely advised the
King, that he should with all his Power first subdue
the Hollanders, before he engaged in another War. 
For Maurice, whom they had, after the Departure of
the Earl of Leicester, made their Generalissimo both
by sea and Land, had restored their lost Reputation. 
His first Attempt was upon Breda,
         1590. which he took by
a stratagem. In the Year next following he took
Zutphen, Deventer, Hulst and Nimeguen. And in the
Year 1592, steenwyck and Coeverden. In the same
Year the Death of the brave Duke of Parma proved
a great Loss to the spaniards. For the spanish souldiers
growing Mutinous every-where, did not a little
advance the Progresses of the Hollanders. 
         1592. 
         Gertrudenbergh
was taken in the sight of the spanish Army, In
the Year next following Groningen was reduced, whereby
the United Provinces were made entire, and secured
on this side of the Rhine. In the Year 1596, Albert,
Arch-Duke of Austria,
         Arch-Duke Albert, Governour of the spanish Netherlands. 
          arrived as Governour of the
Netherlands, who began his Regency with the Taking
of Hulst. And, because Philip, being oppressed with
Debts, was fain to shut up his Exchequer. Albert, for
want of Money, was not in a capacity to undertake
any thing of moment in the Year next following, but
was soundly beaten near Tougenhout. And after the
Trade of the Hollanders with spain and Portugal, whither
they used to send their ships under Foreign Flags,
had been quite cut off; whereby the spaniards hoped
the sooner to reduce them to Obedience, Necessity, and
the desire of Lucre, taught them another way to obtain
vast Riches. For by this means the Hollanders
were forced to try whether they could sail themselves
into the East-Indies, and to attempt to find out a
nearer Way thither round about the North. But this
Design not succeding, they took the common Course
about Africa; and having with incredible Pains, in

spite of all the Resistance made by the Portuguese,
settled a Trade there, a great many Merchants and others,
who knew no better way to employ their Readymoney,
erected several societies to Trade into the East-Indies:
         1602. 
All which were by virtue of a Patent granted
by the Estates,The East-India Company. formed into one Company, which did
afterwards prodigiously encrease its Power in the EastIndies,
and has conveyed unconceivable Riches into
Holland. In the Year 1597, Maurice took Rhinebergh,
Meurs, and all the rest of those Places of
Over-Yssel, which were as yet in the possession of
spain. 
        §. 11. In the Year 1598, they found out another
Decoy for the Hollanders. For because it was generally
pretended, that they would not live under spanish
subjection, Philip found out this artifice: He Married
his daughter Isabella Clara Eugenia to Albert,
         Isabella Clara Eugenia. Arch-Duke
of Austria, giving unto her as a Dowry Burgundy
and the Netherlands; yet, with this Condition,
That the same should return to spain, if no Heirs proceeded
from this Match, which the spaniards were very
well assured of, the Princess being pretty well in Age;
and besides this, having been spoiled before by means of
some Medicaments administred to her to prevent Conception. 
The Netherlands being then by this means,
according to outward appearances freed from a Foreign
subjection, as having got their own Prince, it was hoped
the Hollanders would the easier re-unite themselves
with the other Provinces; because a Peace being lately
concluded betwixt France and spain at Nervin, the Hollanders
had thereby lost their chief Confederate. But
the Hollanders remained stedfast in their former Resolution,
rejecting all Propositions of Peace made by the
Emperour and the Arch Duke Albert. In the Year
1600,Battel near Newport. 
          
         Maurice fell into Flanders, with an intention to
besiege Newport, but was met by Albert, where a bloody
Battel ensued, and Maurice obtained a most glorious
Victory, who was otherways always averse to Field-fights,
and would never have resolved at that time to
have ventured the whole Fortune of Holland upon the
Issue of a Battel, if he had not been forced to it; wherefore,
without attempting any thing farther, he returned

into Holland. 
         siege of Ostend, 1601. 
         Albert then undertook the siege of
Ostend, during which both sides did their utmost, till
Ambrose spinola forced the place, the besieged having
no more room left to make any Retrenchments. 'Tis
said,The Conquests on both sides. that the Hollanders lost within the Town above
70000 Men, and the spaniards without a great many
more. But in the mean time the spanish Fleet under
the Command of Frederick spinola was destroied, and
Rhinebergh, Grave and sluce taken by Maurice. In
the Year 1605, spinola retook from the Hollanders,
Lingen, Groll and Rhinebergh, and Maurice sustained
some loss before Antwerp. The last glorious Action in
this War was, that of James Heemskirke, who burned
the spanish Fleet in the Harbour of Gibraltar, where
he himself was killed. The spaniards therefore finding
it impossible to reduce Holland by force, which they
found encreased in strength by the War; and being
besides this, jealous of Henry IV. and quite out of
breath by this tedious War, they resolved to make an
end of it at any rate. How desirous the spaniards
were of the Peace may easily be conjectured from hence,
That Albert himself proposed the Treaty to be at the
Hague, and first sent spinola himself thither as Embassadour,
whereas the Hollanders carried it very high,
and were very resolute. The Business met with great
difficulty, before it could be brought to the conclusion
of a Truce of twelve Years: The greatest obstacle was,
that the Hollanders urged it closely, That spain without
any Exception should declare them a free People,
which the spanish Embassadours refusing to do, at last
this Medium was found out; That spain and the
Archduke Albert did declare, they would treat with
the Netherlanders, As a free Nation. And they being
not satisfied also with this, the President Janin, who was
sent thither in behalf of France, answered, That the
word As could not add much to the strength of spain,
nor diminish theirs; and that it was their Business to
secure themselves and their state by Arms and not
by Words. A Truce of 12 Years, Both Parties kept what they were possessed
of, and the Hollanders maintained their Navigation into
the East Indies, which the spaniards would fain
have got from them; but the chief cause, why the
Hollanders at that time when their Affairs were in so

good a Condition, consented to a Truce, seems to be,
that they began to be jealous of France, for fear, lest
that King should snatch Flanders away upon a sudden,
which must needs have proved their Ruin. Besides this,
Maurice being grown very Powerfull during this War,
was likely to be troublesome to their Liberty. And
this was the first step which Holland made towards
the Establishment of a free commonwealth. 1609. 
        §. 12. soon after the Truce was concluded, the Hollanders
were engaged in the Business concerning the
succession of the Country of Juliers;
         A Quarrel about the Dutchy of Juliers. 
          for the Emperour,
after the death of the last Duke, being very desirous
to annex these Countries unto his House, had
sent the Archduke Leopold, to make a sequestration,
who took the strong City of Juliers, but was beaten
out again by the Hollanders, with the Assistance of the
French. But a difference arising afterwards betwixt the
Elector of Brandenburgh and the Duke of Newburgh,
who had at first made an Agreement betwixt themselves;
and the Duke of Newburgh having called to his
Assistance spinola, who took the City of Wesel: The
Hollanders on the other hand sided with the Elector of
Brandenburgh, and put Garrisons into Rees and Emeric,
whereby the Country of Cleves was involved in the
War of the Netherlands. 
        §. The Differences between the Remonstrants and Contra-Remonstrants
          13. But there arose a more dangerous intestine
Division in Holland betwixt the Arminians or Remonstrants
(as they are termed) and others; which Division
was partly occasioned by a state-jealousie, partly
by Disputes among the Divines. We have said before,
that Prince William did endeavour under-hand to be
soveraign over the United Provinces, which was prevented
only by a very few Voices. Then after his Death
his son Maurice pursued the same Design, but was opposed
by the chief Men among them; who alledged,
That their Labour was very ill bestowed, if in place of
a great One, they should be brought under subjection
to a little Prince. Among these, one of the chiefest was
John of Olden Barneveldt, Pensionary of Holland, who
had been always for upholding the publick Liberty. 
But because the Authority of the Captain-General was

more conspicuous during the War,Afterwards managed by state Policy. 
         Maurice endeavoured
to set aside the Treaty with spain; but Barnevelt
did, as much as he could, promote the Truce with
spain, knowing that in time of Peace, the Authority of
the Captain-General would be diminished, which Maurice
kept in good remembrance. In the mean time
Arminius, a professour of Divinity in the University of
Leyden, had defended several Propositions concerning
Predestination, and some other Articles relating to the
same, with less rigour than the rest of the Reformed
Churchs had hitherto generally taught. His Opinion
was after his death opposed by one Francis Gomarus. 
This Dissension being spread abroad, most of the
Clergy sided with Gomarus, but the chief states-men
with Arminius. But because the generality of the
People followed the footsteps of the Clergy, Maurice,
who after the Death of his elder Brother, was become
Prince of Orange, declared himself for the Gomarists. 
And there happening great Tumults in several places;
viz. at Alckmaer, Leyden and Ʋtrecht, the Prince
took this opportunity to displace up and down such
Magistrates as adhered to the Arminians. Barnevelt,
Hugo Grotius, and some others, where, under the same
pretext, taken into Custody; the first by a sentence of
the states-General lost his Head in the 72d. Year of his
Age; Grotius was condemned to a perpetual Imprisonment;
out of which he afterwards made his escape
by means of his Wife, who had enclosed him in a Chest. 
And tho' at the synod of Dort the Doctrine of Arminius
was condemned as erroneous,1629. yet this Violence
of the Prince against a Man, who had deserved so well,
was very ill resented by a great many: And these two
Factions have ever since taken so firm root there, that
it is not improbable, but at last they may occasion the
ruin or change of the state. §. The spanish War renewed, 1621, 14. But Dangers from abr•ad did afterwards appease
these inward Dissensions. For the time of the
Truce being expired, the War began a-fresh with spain. 
In the Year 1622, spinola took Juliers, but was obliged
to raise the siege from before Bergen op Zoom; because
the Count of Mansfeld and Christian Duke of Brunswick,
         
having defeated the spanish Army near Fleury,
marched to the Assistance of the Hollanders. To revenge
this Affront, spinola besieged Breda; and Prince
Maurice having in vain endeavoured to raise the siege;
and besides this, his Attempt upon the Castle of Antwerp
having proved unsuccessfull,Prince Maurice dies, 1625. he fell into a deep
Melancholy, and died, Breda being not long after forced
by Famine to surrender it self. Prince Frederick Henry I. To Prince Maurice,
succeeded in the stadtholdership and all other Offices,
which had been in his possession, his Brother Frederick
Henry,
         1627. who took Groll. In the Year 1628, Pieter
Heyn took the spanish silver-fleet; and in the Year
next following the Prince took Bois le Duc. During
this siege, the spaniards made an Inrode into the Velaw,
hoping thereby to give the Hollanders a diversion,
who were put into a great Consternation. But the
Hollanders on that very day surprized the City of Wesel,
which obliged the spaniards to repass the River
Yssel as fast as they could: And from that time forwards
the spaniards despaired of ever reducing Holland
under their Obedience. In the Year 1630, the
Hollanders got first footing in Brasile. In the Year
1631, they surprized some Thousands of spaniards
near Bergen op Zoom, who were gone out in shallops
upon some secret Enterprize. In the Year next
following the Prince took Venlo, Ruremond, Limburgh
and Macstricht, and Pappenheim endeavouring
to relieve the last, was soundly beaten. In the Year
1638 the Prince took Rhinebergh, but in the Year next
following the spaniards,
         A League Offensive between France and Holland, 1635. 
         Limburgh. An Offensive
Alliance was made betwixt France and Holland, wherein
they had shared the Netherlands betwixt them:
But this Alliance proved fruitless, the Hollanders being
very well satisfied, that this Design did not succeed,
being glad not to have the French for their Neighbours
on the Land-side: But the spaniards surprized
shenkenshantz,
         1636. which the Hollanders retook not without
great trouble. In the Year 1637 the Prince retook
Breda, but the spaniards, Venlo and Ruremond. In
the Year 1638, the Hollanders were bravely beaten
near Callo; but in the Year 1639, Martin Tromp entirely
destroied the spanish Fleet, which lay in the

         Downs, and was intended to attack sweden, in conjunction
with the Danes. 
         Prince William II. In the Year 1644, Ghent,
and in the Year next following Hulst was taken
by William II. Peace concluded at Munster, 1648. who had succeeded his Father: It
is thought, that he might also have taken Antwerp,
if the Province of Zealand and Amsterdam had not
opposed it, they being grown powerfull out of its
Ruins. At last, a Peace was concluded at Munster,
betwixt spain and Holland, wherein it was declared a
free commonwealth, to which spain should for the
future make no Pretensions whatsoever. And tho'
France and the Prince did oppose this Peace with their
utmost Endeavours, yet the Hollanders did consider,
that the spaniards having granted all that they could
desire, the Cause of the War ceased: They feared, besides
this, that spain might be brought too low, and
France grow too powerfull; and the Province of Holland
was considerably indebted. Thus Holland ended
this tedious War with great Reputation, but the spaniards
with great Dishonour, having besides this,
quite enervated themselves. Tho' this is observable,
that as long as the Hollanders were engaged in the War
against spain, they were favoured by every body except
the spanish Party; but immediately after the
Peace was concluded, both France and England, by
whom they had been hitherto uph•ld, gave manifest
proofs of their Jealousie of them. §. War with Portugal. 
          15. But the Hollanders could not enjoy Peace
very long; for soon after Brasile rebelled against them,
submitting it self to the Portuguese, which proved very
disadvantageous for the West-India Company; but
the East-India Company drew great Advantage from
it; for this having occasioned a War with Portugal,
which lasted till the Year 1661, the Hollanders took
from the Portuguese almost all the places, which
they were possessed of in the East-Indies. 
         Divisions in Holland. 
          In the Year
1650, a remarkable Dissension arose in Holland, which
might have proved the cause of great Calamities. For
the War with spain being now at an end, some of the
states, and especially the Province of Holland, were of

Opinion, That to ease the Publick, their Forces should
be diminished; which the Prince opposed, under pretence,
that it would not be adviseable to be without an
Army, as long as France and spain were engaged in a
War. And the Opinion being divided concerning this
Business, it was agreed upon by the Majority of the
states-General, who were great Friends of the Prince,
that the Prince should visit in person these Cities, to
try, whether he could convince the Magistrates in this
point: Against this petitioned some of the Cities in
Holland, and especially Amsterdam, fearing, that if
the Prince should come in person to them, he might,
by changing the Magistrates and other Alterations, do
something which might prove prejudicial to their Liberty. 
The Prince being dissatisfied at these proceedings,
replied, That this was done to affront him and
his Office, and therefore desired, that Reparation
should be made him; but the Cities insisted upon their
former Resolution, alledging, that it was according
to their Privileges. Da Witt and others made Prisoners by the Prince. Then the Prince took into Custody
six of the states of Holland, whom he supposed to
be chiefly against him, among whom the chiefest were
the sieur the Witt, Burghermaster of Dort, whom he
sent all together Prisoners to the Castle of Louvesteyn. 
He also privately ordered some Troops to march towards
Amsterdam, to surprize that City; but some of
these Troops having lost their way in the Night-time,
the Design was discovered by the Hamburgher Post-boy:
And the Amsterdamers perceiving that the Prince intended
to force them to a Complyance, opened their
sluces, and put the Country round about it under
Water: At last the Business was agreed, and the Prince
had this satisfaction given him, that the sieur Bicker
Burghermaster of Amsterdam was deposed, and the Prisoners
in the Castle of Louvestein were set at liberty, under
condition that they should be discharged from their
places. But this Business was likely to have been the
occasion of more troubles, if the Prince had not died
soon after. The Birth of Prince William III. soon after his death, viz. in the Year 1650,
on the 13th day of November, his Princess was brought
to Bed of William III. the present Prince of Orange. 
         
In the Year 1651, the United Provinces held a grand
Assembly, where they renewed the Union, being now
destitute of a Governour. §. War with the English Parliament. 16. Not long after the Hollanders were engaged
in a heavy War with the English Parliament, which
at the beginning being very ambitious of their Friendship,
sent one Dorislaw to the Hague, who before he
had his publick Audience, was murthered by some scots
who were all masked. And the Parliament having received
no satisfaction upon this account, began to look
with an ill Eye upon them, which they little regarded,
till Cromwell had reduced the scots. And, tho'
the Parliament sent other Embassadours to the Hague,
yet the Dutch were not very forward, but were for
protracting the Treaty, till the Embassadours having
been affronted by the Rabble, departed dissatisfied:
Whereupon the Parliament gave out Reprisals against
them, declaring withal, That no Merchandises should
be transported into England, except in English Bottoms,
and the English Privateers began to fall every
where upon the Dutch Merchant-ships. The Hollanders,
who were not very unanimous among themselves,
did resolve at last, to try first whether the Business
might be compounded by fair means, and if that did
not succeed, to begin the War in good earnest, and
for this purpose Embassadours were sent into England. 
Tromp in the mean while was sent out with a Fleet, to
secure their Commerce, and meeting with the English
Admiral Blake, and refusing to strike, a bloody Engagement
ensued, which ended with equal loss on both
sides. The Hollanders pretended, that this had happened
by accident; both Parties however made great
Preparations for War, and fought twice, the Advantage
remaining on the English side, notwithstanding
they were beaten near L•ghorn. But in the last Engagement
the Hollanders having lost their Admiral
Tromp, and seven and twenty Men of War, they were
obliged to conclude a Peace with Cromwell,
         A Peace▪ 1654. which was
very advantageous and glorious on his side, they being
among other Articles obliged, for the future, never

to make any one of the House of Orange their stadtholder. 
It was observed, that the Dutch ships were
not large enough, which Error the Hollanders corrected
afterwards. Differences with swedeland. 
          In the Year next following the Hollanders
were grown jealous of the great success of the
swedes against Poland, and being desirous to prevent
the swedes from becoming Masters of Prussia, they
stirred up the King of Denmark against them. But
the Danes having been worsted in this War, the Hollanders
sent a Fleet to relieve Copenhagen, which was
besieged by the swedes: A bloody Battel was fought
in the Oresound, betwixt the swedish and Dutch
Fleets, wherein the Hollanders lost two Admirals, but
nevertheless gained their point in relieving of Copenhagen. 
And in the Year next following they also bore
their share in the Battel of Funen,
         1660. till at last a Peace
was concluded before Copenhagen, to the small satisfaction
of the Danes, who accused the Hollanders, that
they had not been zealous enough in their Assistance
against the swedes; but the Hollanders were afraid,
that England and France might declare for sweden,
and under that pretence fall upon them; besides that,
they thought it their Interest, not to let Denmark
grow too powerfull. §. The second War with England, 16•5. 17. Holland was then for a few Years at Peace,
till a bloody War broke out betwixt them and the
English, who could not but think the flourishing
Trade and great Power of the Hollanders at sea, to
be very prejudicial to them. France blew up the
Coals, being desirous to see these two mighty states
weaken one another's Power. In this War the English
had the Advantage in the first and third Engagements,
but the Hollanders in the second: But the
English, at last, being willing to save Charges, did resolve
only to infest the Hollanders by their Privateers,
and not to equipp a Fleet, which the Hollanders taking
an advantage of, ventured to enter the River of
Thames; and having landed near Chattam, they
burned several ships in the Harbour. This obliged
England to make a Peace with them, which was by

mediation of the Crown of sweden concluded at Breda. 
In this War Holland recovered its Reputation, which it
had lost in Cromwell's time, and shewed it self not to
be inferiour in strength at sea to England; but they
discovered their Weakness on Land, the Bishop of
Munster having been very troublesome to them. §. England and France declare War with Holland. 
          18. At last, in the Year 1672, a prodigious
storm fell upon Holland, which at first threatened its
ruin; France attacking it by Land, and England by
sea. It was surprising to see how the French in a few
days time took the Provinces of Gueldres, Over-yssel
and Ʋtrecht, which occasioned so general a Consternation,
that some are of Opinion, they might have
taken Amsterdam it self, if they had immediately
gone towards it, whilst the first Consternation lasted. 
some lay the fault upon Rochford, who having
received Orders to make an attempt upon that City,
tarried two days at Ʋtrecht, which he bestowed in receiving
of Complements, the Amsterdamers getting
thereby time to take a Resolution for their Defence. 
It served also for a great Encouragement to the
Hollanders, that the Bishop of Munster was forced to
go away from before Groningen, he having, together
with the Elector of Collen, taken the French side. In
the Year next following the French took Maestricht
from the Hollanders. But the Hollanders having behaved
themselves bravely in four sea Engagements,
and the Parliament of England being become very jealous
of France, a separate Peace, was by the Mediation
of spain, concluded betwixt Holland and England. 
The Emperour and spain having then declared for Holland,
the French King took his Garrisons out of all the
conquered Places, having first exacted from them
great Contributions, except Naerden and Grave,
which were retaken by force. Thus the Hollanders got
all their places again except Maestricht; Rhinebergh
which belonged to the Elector of Collen being restored
to him, and the Country of Cleves to the Elector of
Brandenburgh. This War also restored the Prince of
Orange to the same Dignity, and that under better

Conditions than they had been in the possession of his
Ancestors. For the Common People, which already
favoured the House of Orange, being put quite into a
Consternation by the prodigious success of the French,
and being persuaded, that this Misfortune was occasioned
by the Treachery of some who sat at the Helm,
and that no body but the Prince could restore the decaied
state, did raise Tumults in most Cities, which
the Prince was forced to appease, by deposing the former
Magistrates, and putting in their room such as he
knew were favourers of himself. In one of these Tumults
Cornelius and John du Witt,
         The Du Witts murthered. two Brothers, were
miserably murthered by the Rabble in the Hague;
though a great many are of Opinion, That especially
the last of these, who had so long sat at the Helm,
had better deserved of his native Country. Tho the
Prince had been not a little instrumental in appeasing
the Commotions, whereby Holland was put in a condition
to recover it self, yet he was not so successfull in
his War against France: For he received a considerable
loss near seneffe,
         1674. he was repulsed before Maestricht,
and endeavouring to relieve st. 1676. 
         Omer, he was
defeated by the French;
         1677. and the Dutch Fleet which
was sent to the Relief of sicily had no great success. 
At last their Fear, that through long War their
Liberty might be endangered by the Prince, influenced
them to make a separate Peace with France,
by virtue of which Maestricht was restored to the
Hollanders. 
        §. The Constitution. 19. The seven Provinces of the Ʋnited Netherlands
are filled with a prodigious number of People,
there being some, who have computed, that in the
Province of Holland, the Number amounts to two
millions and 500000. And unto this vast Number of
People is to be attributed their Industry, increase of
Trade and great Riches; for in a Country which is
not the most fruitfull, and where every thing is very
dear, they must else of necessity perish by Famine:
But most of the Inhabitants were transplanted thither
out of other Countries; out of France during the times

of the Civil Commotions; out of England under
the Reign of Queen Mary; out of Germany during
those long Wars there; but chiefly, out of the other
Provinces of the Netherlands, at the time of their revolting
from spain. These strangers were invited into
this Country by its convenient situation, the Liberty
of Religion and the Government; by its extraordinary
Constitutions and Conveniencies for Trade
and Correspondency in all Parts; and at last, by the
great Reputation which the states have gained abroad,
by their wise Management at home, and success of
their Arms abroad. And because every body, who
either brings some Means along with him, or has
learned something to maintain himself withall, finds a
good Reception in Holland; even those who are prosecuted
in other places find a certain Refuge in this
Country. Their Genius. The Netherlanders are commonly very
open-hearted, down-right and honest, very free in
Words and Conversation, not easily to be moved or
stirred up; but if once made soundly angry, not easily
to be appeased. If you Converse with them without
Haughtiness and with Discretion, so as to accommodate
your self a little to their Inclinations, you may
do with them what you please. Charles V. used to
say of them, That there was not a Nation under the
sun, that did detest more the Name of slavery, and yet
if you did manage them Mildly and with Discretion,
did bear it more patiently. But the Rabble here is very
bad, it being a common Custom to speak ill and
despicably of their Magistrates, as often as things do
not answer Expectation. The Hollanders are very
unfit for Land-service, and the Dutch Horse-men are
strange Creatures, yet those who live in Gueldres, and
upon the Borders of Westphalia, are tolerably good. 
But at sea they have done such Exploits that they
may be compared with any Nation in the World. 
And the Zealanders are esteemed more Hardy and Venturous
than the Hollanders. They are also generally
very parsimonious, not much addicted to the Belly,
it being not the Custom here to spend their yearly Income,
but to save every Year an overplus. This saving

way of living upholds their Credit, and enables them
to bear such heavy Taxes without being ruined by
them. They are very fit for all sorts of Manufactury,
and very much addicted to Commerce, not refusing to
undergo any Labour or Danger, where something is
to be got, and those that understand Trade deal very
easily with them. They are very punctual in every
respect, pondering and ordering a thing very well before
they begin it. And there is scarce any Nation in
the World so fit for Trade as the Dutch, this being very
praise-worthy in them, that they always choose rather
to get somewhat by their own Industry, than by
Violence or Fraud. But especially, the greatest Liberty
which they enjoy, is a great Encouragement for
Trade. The chiefest Vice among them is Covetousness,
which however is not so pernicious among them,
because it produces in them Industry and good Husbandry. 
There is a great many who have been amazed
at the great Conduct which has appeared in the management
of their Affairs, notwithstanding that the
Hollanders in general are rarely of extraordinary Wit
or Merits: some alledge this for a Reason, That a
cold Temper and Moderation of Passions are the fundamental
Qualifications of such as intend to manage
state Affairs. §. The Nature of 〈◊〉 Country. 20. The seven Ʋnited Provinces are not very
large in Extent, they being to be reckoned but for
one Corner of Germany; but they are filled up with
so considerable a Number of beautifull, large and populous
Cities, that no other place of the same bigness
is to be compared to it. Besides the seven Provinces,
they are possessed of some Cities in Flanders and Brabant,
viz. Hulst, sluce, Ardenburgh, Bois le Duc,
Maestricht, Breda, Bergen op Zoom, Grave, and some
others. They also keep a Garrison in Embden, thereby
to secure the River of Embs. The Country in general
is more fit for Pasture than Tilling, it producing
scarce so much Corn as is sufficient for the fifth part
of its Inhabitants. But this want is made up by the
Industry of the Inhabitants, and the great conveniency

of so many Rivers and the seas, fit for Fishing
and Navigation. The Herring Fishery and that of Codds
brings in vast Riches to them; and some English have
computed, That the Hollanders sell every Year 79200
Lasts (which makes 138400 Tuns) of Herrings,
which amount to the value of 1372000l. not including
what is transported into spain, Italy and France,
and what is consumed at home. Of their shipping and Commerce. But their shipping
and Commerce is of much greater Advantage to
them, which does flourish there to that degree, that
some are of Opinion, That in Holland are more ships
than in all other parts of Europe. Besides, Holland's
situation in the midst of Europe makes it very fit for
Trade, so that it sends its ships with great Conveniency
into the East and Western seas; and though the
Commodiousness of those vast Rivers of the Rhine,
Meuse, Elbe, Weser, and Embs, draw the Commodities
out of Germany, and in exchange for these vends
its Manufacturies there: For Holland has in regard,
especially of the Rhine and the Meuse, a great Advantage
in its Trade before England, tho' this on the other
hand, has better Harbours and a deeper Coast:
And because Holland is at the latter end of the Year
commonly overflown with Waters, which makes the
Air very thick and foggy, Nature has been kind to
this Country, in that about that time the Wind blows
much Easterly, which disperses the Vapours, refreshes
the Air, and renders it wholsome; but from hence it
is that their Harbours are often shut up with Ice for
three Months together, whereas they are always open
in England. The Hollanders trade almost into every
Corner of the World, they having been very carefull
to erect Fortresses and Colonies in far distant Countries. 
But the East-India Company,East-India Company. 
          especially, has
vastly encreased her Trade and Riches; for this Company
has extended her Trade from Basora, which is
situated near the great Bay of Persia, at the very
Mouth of the River Tigris, all along a prodigious
Tract of rich Ground near the sea side as far as to the
utmost parts of Japan; she stands there in Confederacy
with many Kings, and with many of them has

made Treaties of Monopolies, and is possessed of a great
many strong Holds in those parts. The Capital City
there is Batavia, in Java Major, where the Governour
General keeps a Court like a King, under whose
Jurisdiction are the other places. The Company is
sovereign Mistress over all these Countries, the chiefest
of which are the Isles of Molucca and Banda, Amboina,
Malacca, the Coast of the Island of Zeilon, Patiacatta,
Musulapatan, Negapatan upon the Coast
of Cormandel, Cochin, Cananor and Cranganor upon
the Coast of Malabar, and several more; whether
they have a free Trade in the East-Indies with China,
I cannot affirm, tho' it is certain that the Chineses
drive a great Trade with them in Batavia; but in Japan
they have the whole Trade alone, no Portuguese
being permitted to come there. This Company is
able to set out a Fleet of betwixt 40 and 50 Capital
ships, and to raise an Army of 30000 Men. The first
Funds of this Company did amount to sixty Tuns of
Gold, which in the space of six Years, deducting all
the Charges and Dividends made to the Owners, was
encreased to three hundred Tuns of Gold. The
Funds of the West-Indi•
          Company was of fourscore
Tuns of Gold,The West-India Company. 
          and flour•shed extreamly at the beginning,
but ruined it self by making too great Dividends,
and not keeping a Fund sufficient for the carrying on
of the War against spain. Besides, those concerned in
this Company were more eager after Conquests than
Trade, and when Brasile revolted they received a capital
blow: Yet they are possessed in Gumea, of the
Castle de Mina; and if I am not mistaken of Loanda
in Angola, and some other places, as also some of the
Caribby Islands, and of New Holland, in the Northern
parts of America. They have also lately begun to
erect some Colonies in Guiana, and on the great River
of Orenoque. some of the most curious have observed,
that a great many things concurr in Holland for the
promoting of Trade, which are not to be met withall
all at once in any other Country: As for example,
the great quantity of People, the Conveniency and security
of the Country, the small Interest which is paid

for Money, which shews the great superfluity of ready
Money; the severity used against Thieves, Cheats,
and Banquerooteers; the Bank of Amsterdam, great
number of Convoys, and moderate Customs, that they
are so exact and regular in their way of Trading, that
the Magistrates are generally Merchants, or at least,
such as have an Interest in Commerce; That they are
Masters in the East-Indies, and that by reason of the
Frugality and Industry of the Inhabitants, far more
Commodities are exported than imported. And it is
observable, that tho' the Hollanders are Masters of the
spice in the Indies, yet they use them least of all themselves. 
They have also the greatest share in the silktrade
in Persia, and yet they cloath themselves in
Woollen Cloath, generally speaking. Nay, they sell
their fine Cloaths abroad, and send for courser out of
England for their own use. They sell their delicious
Butter, and send for other out of the North of England
and Ireland for their use. French Wines and
Brandies are the chiefest Commodities which are consumed
here, yet even when they make a Debauch,
they are not overlavishing. §. strength and Weakness of this Commonwealth. 21. From what has been said, it is manifest that
the strength of this commonwealth is founded upon
Trade and its Naval Force, which is absolutely necessary
to maintain the former; nor is there any Country
so stocked with good seamen, for the setting out of a
great Fleet. But on the Land-side, where the Country
cannot be under Water, it is not near so strong. For
tho' they do not want Money to raise an Army of Foreigners,
yet is it not always adviseable, for a commonwealth
to rely only upon such as have no other
tye but their Pay, since they may easily prove unfaithfull,
or else, mis-led by the General, assist him in
over-turning the Liberty of the state. And it has been
in regard of this that some have advised, that the
Provinces of Holland and Zealand should separate
themselves from the rest, and only endeavour to
strengthen themselves betwixt the Meuse, the Rhine,
and south-sea; and in case of Necessity, by opening of

their sluces, put the Country under-water; but for
the rest, only endeavour to strengthen themselves at
sea: But to examine this Proposition, is not now my
business. There are several Inconveniences that proceed
from the very Form of the Government of this
state. For, to speak properly, these seven Provinces
do not make up one entire commonwealth, but
there are seven Common wealths,Form of Government. which by the Union
at Ʋtrecht are joined into one Confederacy; they
have their Deputies constantly residing at the Hague,
whose business it is to take care of such Affairs as concern
the whole Union; and if any thing of moment
is to be decreed, they send to the several Provinces,
and according to the Approbation of these they make
their Decrees: these Deputies are called the states-General. 
Nay, it seems that each Province is rather a
Confederacy, than one City or commonwealth, because
the several Members of each Province do treat
with one another like Confederates, and not like one
Body, where one is superiour to the other, or the
majority of Votes determines a business. For even in
the Provincial Assemblies a great many things cannot
be determined by the Plurality of Votes, but every
Member's consent is required. Which shows, that these
Provinces and Cities not united by so strong a Tye, as
those who are governed by one soveraign, except as
far as Necessity obliges them to keep together. And
the great Cities are filled with Rabble; which if once
put in motion, uses to make strange work among
them. It is therefore the great Care of the Magistrates,
that they are kept in constant Employment to get
Bread, for Famine would quickly be the occasion of
great Tumults here. There is also a Jealousie betwixt
Holland and the other Provinces; the latter pretending
to some Prerogative, as being the most Powerfull, and
contributing most to the Publick; whereas the others
are for maintaining their Liberty and Equality. All
the rest of the Cities are especially jealous of Amsterdam,
because this City draws abundance of Trade from
the rest, and puts them in apprehension, as if she were
ambitious to domineer over them. But the greatest

Irregularity happens in their Constitution, by means of
the Prince of Orange,
         Prince of Orange. 
          who having the Favour of the
Common people, of the Land-souldiers and the Clergy
(for the Clergy hate the Arminians, who being
of the Barnefelt Faction, are Enemies of the Prince)
seems to endanger their Liberty. Wherefore the chief
Men in the Cities, to whom belongs the Magistracy
there, possess their places in continual fear, except they
will be pliable to the Prince of Orange; Whose interest
is also inconsistent with that of the state, because no
Land way can be advantageous for Holland; whereas
in time of War, his Authority is much greater than
otherwise. And therefore according to this Form of
the Government, scarce a firm Peace can be established
at home. It may easily happen that the Prince may
aspire to be their soveraign. 1675. And when the Province
of Gueldres did offer to him the soveraignty, he did
give them to understand, That if all the rest were of
the same Opinion, they should have no occasion to
look for him behind the Wine-pipes, as the Jews did
for saul; yet the wiser sort are of opinion, that he
would reap no great benefit from this soveraignty,
since it would be scarce possible to keep so many great
Cities in Obedience against their Will. For Cittadels
and Garrisons would prove the Ruin of Trade, which
never flourishes where absolute Power controuls the
subject. Wherefore it seems more adviseable for the
Prince to be satisfied with what Power he has, it being
certain, that if he knows how to manage the Humour
of the People, he is almost able to do what he
pleases. Whether it is their advantage to have a soveraignty. It has been a great Dispute, whether it be
for the advantage of these Netherlands, to have a Governour
General. Those who are for the Affirmative,
alledge, That this Country having been from ancient
Time under the Jurisdiction of a limited soveraignty,
has been used to that Form of Government; That it
conduces to the outward splendour of the commonwealth,
and to uphold the Authority of the Magistrates
in the Cities; That thereby Factions and Tumults
are kept under and suppressed. That thereby
are prevented a great many Inconveniences in executing

any designs of moment, which were incident to
an Aristocratical and Democratical state; viz. slow
and divided Counsels in Consultations, delays in Executions,
and the divulging of secret Designs; all which
we will leave undetermined here. This is also to be
esteemed one of the Weaknesses of this commonwealth,
that so great a number of Inhabitants cannot
be maintained by the Product of the Land, but must
get their Bread from abroad, and by the help of Foreigners. 
Wherefore the certain Ruin of this commonwealth
is at hand,Other Defects of this commonwealth. when-ever its Trade and Navigation
should be stopt; which however is not altogether
impossible to happen. The difference of Religion
is commonly reckoned among the weaknesses of
a state. But some make this one of the main Pillars
of the flourishing Condition of Holland, because it
contributes greatly to the strength and Encrease of
this state. The Reformed Religion is here the Established
Religion, all the rest being only tolerated:
The Papists are connived at, but also they keep over
them a strict Eye, for fear the Priests, who all depend
on the Pope, should enter into a Correspondency with
spain. Yet it is rarely seen in Holland, that one subject
hates the other, or prosecutes him upon the score
of Religion. It has been the saying of some, that in
other Countries Religion doth more good, but in Holland
less harm. It is also very inconvenient for the
Inhabitants, that all sorts of Victuals are sold at so excessive
a Rate: The reason of which is, That the greatest
Revenues of Holland, are raised by way of Excise
upon these Commodities; and it is a common saying,
That before you can get a Dish of Fish ready dressed
upon your Table at Amsterdam, you have paid above
Thirty several Taxes for it. And notwithstanding all
these heavy Impositions, the state is much in debt. 
There are some also who pretend, that the Traffick of
the Dutch does grow less and less; for which they alledge
several Reasons; viz. That since the Peace concluded
at Munster, other Nations have also applied
themselves to Trade. That the Price of the East-India
Commodities does fall every Year, and yet the Charges

of the Company increases daily. For whereas formerly
five or six East-India ships coming home yearly,
were reckoned very considerable, now eighteen or
twenty do return; which so over-stocks them with
these Commodities, that they are obliged to lay them
up in their Ware-houses for a considerable time, before
they can vent them without Loss. They alledge allso,
that Corn has been of late years so abundant in
France, spain, Italy and England, that the Hollanders
have not sent much of it into these Parts, it being
their custom to fetch Corn from off the East-sea,
where they vent, in exchange of it, most or their
spices: That the great Addition of Fortifications and
sumptuous Buildings to the City of Amsterdam, have
taken up a great quantity of Ready-money, which
might have been better employed in way of Trade;
and that Luxury and Debauchery does encrease daily
in that City. But the Reason why the Hollanders had
such ill success at the beginning of this War, seems to
be, that by the great Eagerness of Gain and Trade,
their Martial Heat was almost extinguished; and that
after the Peace concluded at Munster, they being not
apprehensive of any Invasion by Land, they only applied
themselves to strengthen their Power at sea;
and having dismissed their best Officers, they had supplied
their place with their own Relations; whose
Motto was,1665. 
         Peace and a good Government. For at
the time of the War with England they had dismissed
the Old English Bands; and in the Year 1668, the
French Troops, both which were the flower of their
Armies, which of necessity must have been reduced
into a very ill condition, since the Prince of Orange
had no more concern with them. Besides this, they
thought themselves very secure, not imagining that
France would either dare, or be able to attempt a
Conquest over them, as long as they were sure, that
the Emperour and spain would side with them; neither
did they imagine that the English would join with
the French against them. And at last they hoped,
they would beat the English out of the sea, before
France should be able to take three or four Places. 

They relied upon the old Way of making of War,
when a whole Company was taken up with the Taking
of one Place, and when whole Books were composed
of the Taking of Groll, or the sar of Ghent. 
It is also believed, that some of the Hollanders were
not sorry, that they had no great success by Land,
hoping thereby to bring into discredit the Conduct, and
to diminish the Authority of the Prince, whom they
had been obliged to make their Captain-General against
their Will. §. The Neighbours of Holland. 
          22. As for the Neighbours of Holland, and
what it has to fear or to hope from them; it seems
that the English are the most dangerous Neighbours
to the Hollanders, they being the only Nation that
have been formidable to them hitherto, against their
Pretensions to the Dominion of the seas and Trade;
who are extreamly dissatisfied, that this new commonwealth,
which, when it was in a very tottering
condition, was strongly upheld by them, has now
been before-hand with them in the East-Indies, and
daily spoil their Markets almost every-where. For,
because an English-man is naturally proud,England. and loves
to live well; whereas a Hollander minds nothing so
much as his Gain, being satisfied with an indifferent
share, nor spends any thing idly; a Hollander can sell
cheaper than an English-man, and strangers will always
rather deal with the first than the last. It is
therefore in all probability the chief Interest of Holland,
not to irritate England, and rather to allow
them some Ceremonial Prerogatives at sea, such as
striking, and the like; but withall to strengthen their
Power at sea, that, in case England should really contest
with them for the Trade and Fishing, it may be
able to make head against them. The Hollanders must
also, as much as is possible, endeavour to encourage
the same sort of Manufacture, as is in England, and
either to make these Commodities better, or at least
to sell them cheaper, thereby to get the advantage
from them. The Hollanders ought to stand in great
fear of France on the Land-side,France. especially since that

King is their great Enemy, having opposed for a considerable
time all their Designs. It is therefore very
necessary to be in a good posture on the Land-side,
and to keep fair with the Princes of Germany, who
else would permit the French to march through
their Territories, or else perhaps join with him. 
They must endeavour the Preservation of the spanish
Netherlands, which they ought to consider as
their Frontiers, and whereby spain is obliged always
to side with Holland against France. They
must take care to be provided with good Officers,
and to put the Province of Holland into a better
Posture of Defence on the side of Gueldres. It is
not easie to be supposed, that England and France
will join again against Holland, which may be prevented
by the Hollanders. It is also the Interest of
Holland to take care, that the Naval strength of
France do not increase too much, and to prevent,
as much as in them lies, that they do not settle a
Trade in the East-Indies. And because France draws
the Riches of all Europe to it self by its Manufacturies,
the Hollanders must try to imitate them, and
furnish other Nations with the like. spain. From spain,
Holland need fear nothing either by sea or Land,
since that time, that this Kingdom has lost all its
labour against them. Nay, it is their Common Interest
now that they cultivate a mutual good Understanding,
to stop the Progresses of the French
in the Netherlands: And the spaniards have scarce
any thing left them, from which the Dutch could
have any prospect of Benefit, they being not in a
Capacity to conquer or to maintain the West-Indies. 
And though the Hollanders may be very troublesome
to the spanish silver Fleets, yet the spanish
Privateers may also do them considerable mischief. 
Portugal has no Pretensions against Holland,
         Portugal. and it
ought most to stand in fear of the Hollanders, because
these would be glad of an opportunity to take
from the Portuguese Brosile, and what they have left
in the East-Indies, which however they would not
so easily be able to execute; because the Hollanders
         
are obliged to fetch their Bread out of the East-sea;
they have always taken care that neither of the
Northern Kings should be Master alone of the Eastsea;
         The Northern Crowns. 
which Balance is the easier kept now, since the
sound is divided betwixt sweden and Denmark. And
it is notorious enough what Game they have plaied
with these two Kings. For the rest, it is the general
Interest of Holland, to keep fair with all other
Princes, thereby to maintain a free Commerce everywhere. 
And in these Places where they cannot Trade
alone, it is the Interest of the Hollanders either by
goodness or cheapness of their Commodities, and an
easie Deportment to endeavour to draw the chief
Benefit of Trade to themselves. For this is the easier
and less odious Way to heap up Riches, than if
they should attempt publickly to mix the Foreign
Trade of all other Nations; since it would prove
impossible for them alone to maintain a general
Monopoly. "
"12","CHAP. VII. Of the sWITZERs. §. 1. First Original of this Common
           •ealt•. THese Countries which are possessed now by the
switzers belonged formerly to the German Empire;
but that they were united in one Commonwealth
was occasioned thus; the three small Counties of Ʋry,
switz, and Ʋnder-Walden, which commonly are called
the three Forest Towns, enjoied very antient Privileges,
which they pretended to have been granted them by
the Emperor Lewis, surnamed the Pious, yet so, that
the Emperor used to send thither an Imperial Judge
or Vicar, who had the supreme Jurisdiction in criminal
Affairs. There were also some Monasteries in those
Countries which, tho they enjoied particular Privileges,
yet did they not interfere with their Liberty of the
People. But there lived a great many Noblemen
among them also, who by degrees getting the ascendant
over the Common People, did oppress their Liberty,
especially during the diffe•ences which were betwixt
the Emperors and the Popes, when the Nobility used
to side with the Popes, but the Commonalty with the
Emperor. These divisions betwixt the Nobility and the
People grew very high at the time of the great Interregnum,
which happened after the death of the Emperor
Frederick the second, which breaking out into an
open War, the whole Nobility was driven out of
the Counrry; but by the Emperor Rodolfus's Authority,
a reconciliation having been made betwixt them,
the Nobles were restored to their Estates. Thus these
Countries did enjoy their former Liberty, till the Reign
of Albert I. who having conceived a hatred against
them, because they had sided with his Rival Adolph
of Nassaw, was very desirous to annex them to his Hereditary
Countries; the Monasteries therefore, and a great
many of the Nobility, having, upon his desire, submitted
themselves to the Jurisdiction of the House of Austria:
         
The same was also proposed to the three abovementioned
places, who refusing his proposition, he set
over them Imperial Judges or Vicars, who, contrary to
the antient Custom, began to reside in strong Castles,
and having first tried by perswasions to bring them over
to the House of Austria, afterwards, when they found
their labour lost that way, grew very burthensom to
the People by their oppressions; neither were the Petitions
made against them by the Commonalty in any
ways regarded by the Emperor; nay the Judge of
Ʋnder-Walden, who's name was Geisler, was become
so extravagant, that he set his Hat upon a Pole in the
Market-Place of Altorf, commanding that every body
should pay the same respect to his Hat as to himself;
thereby to make a tryal of their Obedience. And among
others one William Tell having often passed by
without paying his Respect, he forced him to shoot
with an Arrow through an Apple, which was pla•ed
upon his own sons Head; but this man whilst he was
carrying to prison, making his escape, stirred up the
hatred of the People against the Judges. § 2. Th• first Ʋ
           n•on of he switz
          There were at that time three Men of great
Authority among them, viz. Werner stouffacher, born in
switz, Walter Furst born in Ʋry, and Arnold of Melchtale
born in Ʋnder-Walden: These entred into an Association,
whereby it was agreed among them, to rid
themselves of this Tyranny, and to restore their antient
Liberty. A great many more having entred afterwards
into this Association an agreement was made betwixt
them; that in the year 1308. on the first day of January,
they would surprize these Judges in their strong
Castles, and drive them out of the Country. This
Confederacy was made in the year 1307. on the 17. of
October; and having afterwards been put in execution
in the abovementioned year, on the first day of January,
these three places entred into a Confederacy for ten
years for the mutual Defence of their antient Liberties. 
In the year 1315. Leopald Arch-Duke of Austria, son
of Albert I. marched with an Army of 20000 Men
to force them to Obedience; against whom they marched
out with 1300 men, and whilst the Austrian Forces were

marching betwixt the Lane and inaccessible mountains,
some of the switzers by rowling down upon them, and
throwing great heaps of stones among them, put the Enemy
in confusion, whilst the rest fell upon them and
entirely defeated them near Morgarten. Then these
three places renewed their Confederacy,The B•••el near Morgarten. 
          and having
confirmed it by solemn Oaths, they agreed it should
continue for ever. This was done at Brun, in the
year 1320. on the 7th. of December. And this is the
first beginning of that Commonwealth, whose Confederates
used to call themselves Edytsgenossen (which signifies
Allied by Oath) but strangers call them in general
switzers, from that one place called switz. 
        § 3. To fi•st design of this Confederacy. Nevertheless the first intention of this Confederacy
was not to separate themselves from the German
Empire, but only to maintain their antient Privileges;
tho by degrees they began to Administer their own
Affairs at home without sending their Deputies to the
Dyets of the Empire: and the switzers were not till in
the year 1648. viz in the Westphalian Peace declared
quite Independent from the Roman Empire; for the
Emperor Lewis IV. had confirmed the former Confederacy,
and in 1320. had sent them a new Imperial Vicar
or Judge, unto whom, after having received new assurances
to be maintained in their Privileges, they did
Homage, in the name of the Emperor. But the following
Emperors gave them full power to choose Judges
among themselves, granting them the supreme Jurisdiction
both in Civil and Criminal Affairs. In the year
1332. Lucern, and in the year 1351. Zurick entred
into this Confederacy. Lucern was formerly under the
Jurisdiction of the House of Austria. Zurick, which
is the chiefest of the Confederacy, was formerly a free
Imperial City. Immediately after Glaris, and in the
year 1352. Zug and Bern were United with the former. 
The switzers after this time had great Wars
with the House of Austria, and in 1386 slew Leopold
Arch-Duke of Austria,
         Battel near sempach▪
           
          with a great many▪ Nobles, in
the battel near sempach. In the year 1444. the switzers
did give another proof of their Valour; for the
Dauphin of France, afterward, called Lewis XI. marching

with a great Army to disturb the Council then
held at Basil, was attacked by 1900 switzers with such
fury, that tho they all fell in the enterprize, yet did
they strike such a terror into the French, that they
quickly retreated homewards. § 4. Wars wi•h Charles Duk• of Burgundy. 
          In the year 1476 the switzers were engaged in a
war against Charles Duke of Burgundy, who was stirred up
by Lewis XI. who was for setting the Duke at work. 
Against him Rene Duke of Lorain, and the Bishops of
strasburgh, and Basil, made an Alliance with the switzers:
The Emperor Frederick III. also being desirous to
revenge the quarrel of his House, commanded them to
fall upon the Duke of Burgundy, who then was an Enemy
of the Empire. And having afterwards made
a Peace with the Duke without including the switzers,
he hoped they would be severely chastized by this brave
Prince; but things happened quite contrary to his expectation;
for the switzers defeated the Duke in three
great Battels; the first near Granson, afterwards near
Murten, where the Duke had an Army of one hundred
thousand Men, and at last near Nancy in Lorain, where
the Duke himself was killed. By these Victories the
switzers gained great Reputation. In the year 1481. 
Fribourgh and solothurn; in the year 1501. Basil
and shafshausen, and last of all Appen-Zell were united
with this Confederacy. The whole body then of
the swisse Confederacy is composed of 13 Commonwealths,
which they call Places; but the Italians and
French call them Cantons;
         Their All•es among these Zuric, Bern,
Lucern, Zug, Basil, Fribourgh, selothum, and shafshausen,
are Cities; Ʋry, switz, Ʋnderwalden, Glariss and
Appen-Zell, are Countries, where are a good number of
Towns and Villages to be met withal. The switzers
have also some other Confederates, viz. the Abby and
City of s. Gall, the Grisons, the Vallesins, the Cities of
Rotweil, Munthusen, Bienne, the Biel, Geneva, and
Newburgh on the Lake: There are also among them
several Cities and some Counties, which are either
subject to the whole Confederacy or to some particular
Commonwealths. 
§ 5. some o•her Wars of th• 
           switzers
          The switzers were also obliged to fight against
the Emperor Maximilian I. for their Liberty; he having
stirred up the swabian League against them,1499. hoping
by this way to chastise them. But the switzers for the
most part got the better of their Enemies, till through
the mediation of Lewis Duke of Milan a peace was
made betwixt them. Not to relate here some intestine
Commotions among them, scarce worth mentioning,
they have done great Actions abroad, under
the Conduct of other Nations, and more especially
under the French: For Lewis XI. having, whilst he
was Dauphin, sufficiently tryed their Valour in the engagement
near Basil, sought by all ways after he was
King, to make use of the switz in his Wars; wherefore
he allowed them a certain yearly Pension: And
his son Charles VIII. made use of the switzers with
good success in his Expedition against Naples; for the
Italians, when they saw the switzers make such a prodigious
havock among them by the help of their BattelAxes
and large Back-swords; they were so surprized
at it, that they counted the former Wars but like
Childrens play in comparison of this, and looked upon
the switzers more like some Monsters than soldiers. 
Lewis XII. also emploied the switzers in his service in
his Italian Wars, tho they lost great part of their Reputation
there. For these switzers which were listed
in the service of Lewis Menis Duke of Milan, refusing
to fight against their Countrymen that were in the
French Army, thereby betraied this Prince into the
hands of the French. 
        § 6. But in the year 1510. Th•ir Wars with France
          the switzers left the
French service; for the time of agreement with France
being expired, they demanded a larger Pension, and
which Lewis XII. refused to pay them, thinking it unbecoming
the grandeur of a King to be imposed upon
by these Highland Peasants (as he used to call them)
he having therefore dismissed them, took into his
service some of the Grisons and Germans in their stead. 
But this proved very disadvantageous to France; for they
listed themselves under Pope Julius II. and did great
service against France. They attacked the French who

were much more numerous,1513. with such fury, near Novara,
that after a bloody Fight they not only routed
them, but also quite beat them out of Italy. Afterwards
they fell into Burgundy and besieged the City
of Dijon, where the Duke of Tremoville was obliged
to make a very dishonorable agreement with them,
and was glad to send them home with fair promises
of great sums of Money; and if he had not stoped
their progress they would certainly have put France
into the utmost danger, the King of England being at
the same time faln into France on the other side. The
switzers attacked Francis I. 1515 in his Camp near Marignano;
the fight lasted two days, and after a great deal
of bloodshed on both sides the switzers retired in good
order. Wherefore Francis I. in the year next following
gained their Friendship by a great sum of Money,
whose example the succeeding Kings have followed
ever since. Their antient Reputation is much diminished
of late years, partly because they are not altogether
so furious now, partly because other Nations have
found out a way to bring their Infantry into a better
condition. And besides this, those great Back-swords
which the switz used to handle with so much dexterity
by the extraordinary strength of their Arms, are quite
out of use in Europe. 
        § 7. As to the qualifications of these Countries,The 〈◊〉 of the soil. 
which are Inhabited by the switzers, they are very different;
for in the mountainous parts scarce any thing
else but Pasture Grounds are to be met withal; but
tho the Valley and flat Country produce Corn
and Wine in considerable quantities, yet among so vast
a number of Inhabitants there appears no great plenty
here, since Foreign Commodities cannot be imported
without great difficulty, and what is deficient in the
native soil, is not repaired by Traffick and Manufactories. 
'Tis therefore accounted a common calamity among
the switzers if once in some years the Plague does
not come among them, to rid them of so many superfluous
Mouths. Yet they enjoy this benefit by the situation
of their Country, that, by reason of the high
Mountains and narrow Passages, it is almost inaccessible,

especially on the Italian side, and in the midst of
the Country; for some of the outward parts are of a
very easie aocess. § 8. The Gen•ns of this N•
           tion. The switzers pretend to be downright honest
and true to their word; and indeed, they are generally
simple and Plain-Dealing, without any great Cunning
or By-Designs; but they are couragious and soon
provoked to wrath. They are steadfast in their Resolutions,
from whence they dont easily recede; their
valour, constancy, talness and strength of Body, has so
recommended them to a great many Princes, that they
choose their Guards among them; and the King of France
maintains a considerable number of switz Foot souldiers. 
They are very forward to fight, but not to undergo
any other hardship or labour; they expect to
have duely their pay, if that fail, they return home
as fast as they can; from whence comes the Proverb,
No Money no swisse. They do not love to bear hunger
or hardship in other Countries, because they have enough
of that at home. It is one of the Articles of Agreement
made with France, that that Crown shall
never have less than 6000 at a time in pay, and that
these are not to be separated: That in case these Articles
should not be performed, they may be in capacity
to assist one another: They also never will be imploied
in any sea service. § 9. Their strength and weakness The main strength of this Confederate Commonwealth
consists in the number of its Inhabitants:
For in the City of Bern, which has the greatest Territories,
pretends alone to be able to send into the
Field 100000 fighting Men. And it is not to be
questioned, but that, if they had been ambitious of
making Conquests, at that time when their Glory
was at the highest pitch, or had not wanted Conduct,
they might easily have brought under their subjection
the Franche Comte, and a great part of Lombardy;
but the reason why they did not aim at Conquests
was partly their Inclination, which did not prompt
them to encroach upon their Neighbou•s; partly the
constitution of their Government, which seems to be

unfit for great and suddain Enterprises: For each Canton
by itself considered is a Democracy, the highest
Power being lodged in the Guildes; and it is certain,
that such as are of little Understanding and Experience,
are always very positive in their opinions, and suspicious
of all mankind. And the whole Confederacy is altogether
adapted for their common Defence, and for the
maintaining of a firm Union betwixt themselves. The
difference of Religion is also a main obstacle among
them, some of them being Roman Catholicks, but
most Protestants, and both Parties great Zealots in
their Religion: Wherefore it seems a hard task to
make them all truly unanimous, except forced by the
necessity of a common Danger. And in this Democratical
Government it is not to be supposed, that one
man can have sufficient Authority to sway the rest,
and to stir them up to any great and sudden Enterprise. 
And this slowness of their publick Counsels is such a
check upon their natural Valour at home, that they
can employ it no better than to sell it for a little money
to other Nations. § 10. Their neighbours. This is the very reason why the switzers
are the best Neighbours in the World; as being never
to be feared, and always ready to assist you in case
of necessity, if you pay them for it. On the other
hand, they need not stand in great fear of their Neighbours. 
The states of Italy are not in a capacity to do
them any harm, and Germany is not willing to hurt
them. If the House of Austria should attack them,
they are able to defend themselves, and besides this,
they may in such a case be sure to be backed by
France. France alone seems to be their most dangerous
Neighbour; and it has been the wonder of many, why
the switzers rely altogether upon the French Alliance
and Promises, and do not in the least endeavour to
secure their Country against the growing Power of
France; and that in the last war they left the Franche
Comtè to the mercy of the French, which opens the
Passage into their Country, and enables the French to
levy souldiers on their Frontiers at pleasure. It seems
therefore to be the present Interest of switzerland, not

to imitate the French, and nevertheless to take care,
that they do not make themselves Masters of their
Frontier Places, viz. of Geneva, Newburgh on the Lake,
the Four Forest Towns, and Constance. That they do
not send too great a number of their Men into the
French service, whereby they may exhaust their own
stock of souldiers; and that such as are sent into the
French service, may be engaged not to be forgetful of
their Duty to their native Country, so as to be ready
to return home in case of necessity. On the other hand,
France seems to have no great reason to attack the
switzers, as long as they are quiet and do not pretend
to oppose the French Designs; it being evident, that
if France had once obtained its aim, the switzers would
be obliged to submit themselves. And it seems at this
time more Advantageous for the French to make use of
the switzers as their Allies, than by conquering them,
to make them refractory subjects, who, by reason of
their natural stubborness, must be bridled by strong
Garisons, which would scarce be maintained out of
the Revenues of so poor a Country. "
"13","CHAP. VIII. Of the GERMAN Empire. § 1. Te antient condition of Germany. 
          
         GErmany was not antiently one Commonwealth,
but divided into a great many
states, and independent of each other,
most of them being Democracies: And tho some of
them had their Kings, yet these had more Authority to
Advise than to Command. These several states were
at last united under the Government of the Francks:
The Kings of the Merovingean Family having undertaken
several Expeditions into Germany, did reduce several of
these states under their subjection: And Charles the
Great reduced all Germany under his Jurisdiction,Charles t•e Great. he
being at the same time Master of France, Italy, Rome,
and a part of spain; all which Provinces he committed
to the care of certain Governours, who were called
Graves or Marc-Graves. The saxons retained more of
their antient Liberty than the rest; wherefore the better
to keep this, then barbarous Nation in obedience,
he erected several Episcopal sees in saxony, hoping,
by the influence of the Christian Doctrine, to civilize
this barbarous People. Lewis the Pious. 
         Lewis, surnamed the Pious,
son of Charles the Great, had three sons, viz. Lotharius,
Lewis, and Charles, who divided the Empire of
the Francks among them. In this Division Lewis got
for his share all Germany, as far as it extends on this side
of the Rhine, and also some Countries on the other side
of that River, by reason of the Vineyards, as 'tis said,
which are on both sides. Lewis K. of German•. All which he was possessed
of as sovereign, without being in any ways dependent
on his elder Brother, much less the younger, who had
France for his share: And at that time Germany was
first made a Kingdom independent of any other. 
§ 2. Carolomannus, the son of this Lewis, did, after
the death of Charles the Bald, who was King of France,
and had born the Title of Roman Emperour, Conquer
Italy, and took upon him the Imperial Dignity, notwithstanding
that Lewis, son of Charles the Bald and King
of France, had, upon instigation of the Pope, assumed
the same Title. After him succeeded his younger Brother
Carolus Crassus,
         C. Crassus. who maintained both the Kingdom
of Italy and the Imperial Title. 8•7. But the great
Men in Germany having deposed the said Charles, they
made Arnolph, the son of the abovementioned Carolomannus,
King of Germany,
         894. who went into Italy and
took upon him the Title of Roman Emperour, for which
had contended for a good while Berengarius Duke
of Trioul,
         899. and Guido Duke of spoleto. But after
the death of Arnulph,
         Lewis the Child. his son Lewis, surnamed the
Child, obtained the Crown of Germany, under whose
Reign the Affairs of Germany were in so ill a condition,
that he had no leisure to look into those of Italy:
For Arnulph had called to his assistance the Hungarians
against Zwentepold, King of Bohemia and Moravia, who
had Rebelled against him, with whose assistance he reduced
Zwentepold to obedience; but the Hungarians,
who were at that time a most barbarous Nation, having
got a tast of Germany, made an inroad into that
Country, ravaging every where with an inhuman Cruelty. 
They also defeated Lewis near Augsburgh,
         9•5. obliging
him to pay them a yearly Tribute; notwithstanding
which, they ravaged and plundered wherever they
came. This overthrow was chiefly occasioned by the
Kings tender Age, and the Divisions of the great
Men among themselves, who aimed at nothing more
than to establish their own Authority. 9•1. After the
death of Lewis,
         Cunrad. 
         Cunrad, Duke of Franconia, was elected
King Germany, under whose Reign the Potent Dukes
of Lorain, swabia, Bavaria, and saxony, did prete•d
to maintain the sovereignty over their own Countries,
and a Hereditary Possession; which Cunrad was not
able to prevent; and because Henry Duke of saxony
was the most Potent, and Cunrad feared, that at last
he might quite withdraw himself from the German
         
Empire, he upon his Death-bed advised the rest of the
Princes of Germany to make him their King, which was
done accordingly. And thus the Empire was transferred
from the Carolingian Family to the saxons. 
        § 3. Henry the Faulconer. 
         Henry surnamed the Birdcatcher, did bridle the
Fury of the Hungarians: For they having made a great
inroad into Germany, and demanded the Yearly Tribute
from him, he sent them a Mungeril-Dog, and afterwards
Defeated them in a bloody Battle near Merseburgh,
where he slew 80000 of them. Under the
Reign of this King, the greatest part of the Cities
which are situated on the sides of the Rhine. were either
Built, or else Fortified with Walls. This Henry,
also did Conquer the serbes and Wendes, a sarmatick
or sclavonian Nation, who being possessed of a large
Tract of Land in Germany, on the River Elbe, he drove
out of Misnia, Lusatia and the Marquisate of Brandenburgh. 
After he had re-established the Affairs of Germany,
he died in the Year 936. Otto the Great. After him succeeded
his son Otto, surnamed the Great, who at first was
engaged in heavy Civil Wars against several Princes,
but especially against those who pretended to be of the
Race of Charles the Great, and were extremely dissatisfied
that the Royal Dignity was transferred to the
saxons. He was also very Fortunate in his Wars against
the Danes. To the Hungarians, who ventured to
make another Incursion into Germany, he gave a capital
overthrow near Augsburgh, since which time, they
never have dared to shew themselves in Germany. In
Italy there had been great Confusions for a long time, the
soveraignty having been usurped sometimes by one,
sometimes by another, till at last▪ 
         Otto being called thither,
possessed himself both of the Kingdom of Italy and
the Imperial Dignity, it having been then agreed, that
both the Imperial and Royal Dignity of Italy, should be
inseparably annexed, without any further Election, to
the Royal Dignity of Germany, and that no Pope should
be chosen without the Approbation of the King of the
Germans,
         •62. and Otto was Crowned at Rome: tho' this
Conquest has proved not very beneficial to Germany,
the succeeding Popes having made it their Business to

raise continual Disturbances, which was not easy to
be prevented, because these Places were not kept in
awe by strong Castles or Garisons. Wherefore as often
as the Popes were pleased to raise new Commotions,
the Germans were obliged to send great Armies thither,
which continual Alarms consumed great quantities
of Men and Money: In lieu of which, their
Kings had scarce any Revenues out of Italy, except
that they had Free Quarters and Entertainment given
them during their stay there. This Otto died in the
Year 974 leaving for his successour his son Otto II. Otto II. 
who also at first met with great Disturbances from some
of the Princes of Germany. Afterwards Lotharius King
of France would have made himself Master of Loraine,
and had very near surprised the Emperour at Aix la
Chapelle: But Otto marched with an Army through
Champaigne to the very Gates of Paris; but in his return
home received a considerable Loss. At last a
Peace was concluded at Rheims, by Vertue of which,
Loraine was left to the Emperour. He then undertook
an Expedition into Italy against the Greeks, who had
made themselves Masters of that Country; these he
overthrew at first, but received afterwards a grand Defeat,
because the Romans and those of Benevento immediatly
turned their Backs; he himself fell into the
Hands of the Enemy, but found means to make his
Escape from them, and revenged himself against the former
for their Infidelity. He died not long after of Vexation. 
His son Otto III. Otto I▪
          did employ a great part
of his Reign in appeasing these Tumults, which were
raised in Rome by the Consul Crescentius, who aiming at
the sovereignty, was hanged for his pains by Order of
Otto, who was afterwards poysoned by the Widdow of
the said Crescentius with a pair of Gloves made up with
a certain sort of Poyson. 1001. 
         Otto having left no Children
behind him, the Crown was conferred upon Henry II. 
surnamed the Lame, Duke of Bavaria, who sprang from
the saxon Race; with whom Ecbart Landgrave of Hesse,
did contend for the Crown, but lost his Life in the
Quarrel. This Emperour was entangled in continual
Troubles in Italy, and chastised Boleslaus King of Poland,
         
Because he was a great Benefactor to the Clergy,
he was made a saint after his Death. § 4. 1024. 
         Henry II. having left no Children behind
him,Conrad II. the Princes elected Conrad sali Duke of Franconia,
Emperour in his room, which occasioned great Jealousie
in the saxons, and great Wars in Germany. This Emperour
met with great Disturbances both in Germany and
Italy, which were at last all composed. Radolf the last
King of Burgundy and Arus dying without Issue, left
him that Kingdom by his last Will, which he took Possession
of and united the same with Germany, having
forced Eudo the Earl of Champaigne who made a pretension
upon it,1034. to resign his Title. He was also very
Fortunate in his Wars against the Pole•
          and sclavonians,
and died in the Year 1035. Him succeeded his
son Henry,
         Henry III: surnamed the Black, who was continually
allarmed by the Hungarians and the Popes Intrigues,
against whom he maintained the Imperial Dignity with
great bravery. He died in the Year 1056. His son
Henry IV. Henry IV. his Reign was very long, but also very Troublesome
and Unfortunate. Among other Reasons, this
may be counted one of the Chiefest, that he being but
six Years of Age when his Father died, was left to
the Tuition of such as had no true Care of his Education;
and besides this, by selling the Church Benefices
without having any Regard to Deserts, had done considerable
Mischief to the Empire. Wherefore Henry
coming to his riper Years, and perceiving how the Ecclesiasticks
had got all the best Possessions of the Empire
into their Hands, he resolved to dispossess them again,
whereby he drew upon himself the hatred of the Clergy. 
The saxons were also his great Enemies, because he had
by Building up of some Fortresses endeavoured to restrain
their Insolencies; and tho' he often kept his Court
in saxony, yet he seldom preferred the saxons to any Offices. 
Most of the Princes were also dissatisfied
with him, because he rarely advised with them concerning
the publick state of Affairs, but either followed
the Advice of his Counsellors, who were most of them
Men of mean Birth, or else his own Head. These and

some other Reasons, set the saxons against him in an
open Rebellion, with whom he waged long and bloody
Wars,The Pope gives him great trouble till he vanquished them at last. But Pope
Hildebrand or Gregory VII. and his successours, did
raise a more dreadful storm against him; for the Popes
having long since been vexed to the Heart, that they
and the rest of the Clergy should be subject to the
Emperour, Hildebrand thought to have now met
with a fair Opportunity to set the Clergy at Liberty,
at a time when the Emperour was entangled
in a War with the saxons, and hated by most Princes
of the Empire. The Emperour had lived somewhat too
Free in his younger Years, and the Church Benefices having
been rather bestowed upon Favourites or such as
payed well for them, than such as deserved them, furnished
the Pope with a specious Pretence to make a Decree,
that it was not the Emperour's right to bestow
Bishopricks or other Church Benefices upon any Body,
but that it did belong to the Pope. The Emperour was
also summoned to appear at Rome, and to give an Account
concerning his Mis-behaviour, and in case of failure,
he was threatened with an Excommunication. On
the other Hand, the Emperour having declared the Pope
unworthy of his Office, would have deposed him. so
the Pope excommunicated the Emperour, discharging all
his subjects from their Allegiance due to him, which
proved of such Consequence in those Times, that all
his Authority fell to the Ground at once among most of
his subjects, whereby he was reduced to the greatest
Extremity. For most Princes assembled at Trebes, where
they deposed Henry: which sentence, however, was
so far mitigated afterwards, that the same should be
left to the Pope's decision. Henry therefore accompanied
by a few, was obliged to undertake a Journey in
the midst of the Winter into Italy, and being arrived at
Canu•io, was fain to stay three Days barefooted in a
coarse Woollen Habit in the outward Court, and in an
humble posture, to beg the Pope's Absolution, which
he at last granted him. But the Emperour received no great Advantage by it,
for the Italians were quite disgusted at this Demeanour
of his, which obliged the Emperour to make use of his

former Authority to reduce them to Obedience. In
the mean while the Princes of Germany by instigation
of the Pope, did elect Radolph Duke of swabia their
King; but the Bavarians, Franconians, and the Countries
next adjacent to the Rhine did remain in obedience
of the Emperour Henry. Thus a bloody War ensued,
wherein Radolph, and the saxons were vanquished in
two battels, and in the third he lost his right hand and
life. 1084. Then Henry called together an Assembly of the
Bishops, and having deposed Hildebrand, he caused another
to be chosen in his room: He also returned home
himself, and banished Hildebrand. But the saxons persisted
in their Rebellion against the Emperour, who was
again Excommunicated by the Pope, and having first
set up Herman Duke of Luxenburgh, and after his death,
Ecbert Marquess of saxony for their Kings,H•• s•n R•
           
           •els. but to no
purpose; they at last stirred up the Emperors son against
the Father. Against him the Emperour raised a great
Army, whom the son met, and in a deceitful manner
begged his pardon: Upon his perswasions the Father
having abandoned his Forces, and being upon his Journey
to the Dyet at Mayence, accompanied by a few,
this antient Prince was made a Prisoner and Deposed. 1106. 
He died soon after in great misery, who, in sixty two
battels which he had fought in his life time, generally
obtained the Victory. § 5. Henry V. As soon as Henry V. was made Emperour he
followed his Fathers example in maintaining the Imperial
Dignity: For as soon as he had settled the Affairs
of Germany, he marched with an Army towards Rome,
to renew the antient Right of the Emperours in nominating
of Bishops, and to be Crowned there. The
Pope, Paschal II. having got notice of the Emperours
design, raised a great Tumult at Rome, where the
Emperour was so close beset, that he was fain to fight in
Person for his safety: But the Emperour having got the
upper hand, made the Pope a Prisoner, and forced him
to give his consent to his demands. And this
their Agreement was confirmed by solemn Oaths and
Execrations; yet no sooner had the Emperour turned
his back, but the Pope having declared the Agreement

void, stirred up the saxons and the Bishops in Germany
against the Emperour. With these Henry was engaged
in a very tedious War; and perceiving at last, that
there was no other way left to compose these differences,
he granted the Popes demands, by renouncing his Right
to nominate Bishops,1122. at the Dyet held at Worms: which
resignation, as it greatly diminished the Emperour's Authority,
so on the other hand, it strengthened the power
of the Pope. 1125. This Emperour died without Issue. Him
succeeded Lotharius Duke of saxony,
         Lothar•us the sax•n. who had for a
Rival in the Empire Cunrad Duke of Franconia, whom
he quickly obliged to beg fair Quarters. This Emperour
having twice undertaken an Expedition into Italy, did
with great Glory restore Tranquility to that Country;
and, because he used to flatter the Pope, he was in
great esteem among the Clergy. He died in the year
1138. After his death Cunrad III. obtained the Imperial
Dignity, who was opposed by Henry Duke of
saxony and Bavaria, and his Brother Wulff, which occasioned
bloody Wars against him. But peace being restored
among them, he undertook an Expedition into
the Holy Land, where he underwent great Calamities;
for, tho he fought his way through the saracens, and
arrived safely at Jerusalem, yet after he had lost the greatest
part of his Army, without doing any thing of moment,
he was fain to return home. But whilst he was
busie in making preparations for another Expedition into
Italy he died, in the year 1252. § 6. Frederick I. Fredrick I. 
          succeeded him, who by the Italians
was surnamed Barbarossa, Duke of swabia, who
immediately at the beginning of his Reign, having setled
the affairs of Germany, did afterwards reduce Italy
under his obedience; which however was not of long
continuance; for the Milaneses quickly Rebelled, but
were severely chastised, their City having been laid level
with the ground. He was also in continual broils with
the Pope, against whom, and his Associates, he obtained
several Victories; yet being at last tired out with
so many wars, he made peace with him, especially
since his son Otto had been taken Prisoner by the Venetians. 
At the concluding of this Peace, 'tis said, that

Pope Alexander III. did set his foot upon the Emperours
neck, which by a great many is taken for a fable. This
Emperour was the last who maintained the Authority of
the German Emperours in Italy. Last of all he undertook
an Expedition into the Holy Land against saladin the
sultan of Egypt, who had taken the City of Jerusalem:
He beat the saracens several times, but endeavouring
to pass over a River in Cilicia on Horseback, or as some
will have it, intending to wash himself in the River, he
was drowned. 1189. And tho his son Frederic, after his Fathers
death, did take a great many Cities in syria, yet
the whole Expedition had a very bad end, the greatest
part of the Army, together with the Duke Frederick
having been consumed by the Plague,Henry VI. 
          or Famin. Frederick
was succeeded by his son Henry VI. in the Empire,
who, with his Lady Constantia, got the Kingdoms
of sicily, Calabria and Apuiia. This Emperour went
to Rome to receive the Crown from Pope Celestin, when
the Pope sitting in his Chair, and the Emperour on
his knees, put first the Crown upon his head, but immediatly
struck the same off again with his foot, intimating
thereby, as if it was in the power of the Popes
to give and to take away the Imperial Crown. He
died in the year 1198. having just then made great preparations
for an Expedition into the Holy Land, and
sent his Army before, he being ready to follow. § 7. Philip After the death of Henry VI. the Germans
were miserably divided among themselves; for Frederick
II. his son, being then but five years old, his Uncle
Philip pretended to have the Tuition of his Nephew,
and the Administration of the Empire, according to
the last Will of the deceased Emperour; but this being
opposed by the Pope, he perswaded some of the Princes
to elect Otto Duke of saxony. Germany was thus miserably
torn in pieces, most siding with Philip, the rest
with Otto. After a long war an agreement was made
betwixt them, that Otto should Marry the Daughter of
Philip, but lay down the Royal Title, till the death of
Philip, when the same was to be restored to him. Not
long after Philip was murthered at Bamberg by Otto the
Palatin of Wittelbach. After his death Otto obtained

the Imperial Dignity,1208. and having been Crowned at
Rome,
         Otto VI. 
          he resolved to reunite such places as were unjustly
possessed by the Popes to the Empire, which so exasperated
the Pope, that he Excommunicated him, exhorting
the Princes to elect another Emperour. Most
of them were for Frederick II. Frederick II. 
          son of Henry VI. which
made Otto to hasten into Germany; but having in vain
endeavoured to maintain himself in the Empire, he was
forced to surrender the Imperial Crown to Frederick
the second, King of sicily and Naples, and
Duke of suabia; who, after he had bestowed▪ a
considerable time in setling the Affairs of Germany,
went into Italy, where he was Crowned by the
Pope. In the year 1228. he undertook an Expedition
into the Holy Land, and retook Jerusalem from the saracens. 
He was continually alla•med by the intrigues of
the Popes, who were for playing the Masters in Italy;
against whom he bravely maintained his Right. This
occasioned several Excommunications to be thundred out
against him by the Popes, who raised great disturbances. 
From hence had their rise the two famous Factions in
Italy, whereof those who sided with the Pope, called
themselves Guelfs,
         The •ue•fs and G•b••lins. 
          but these who were for the Emperour,
Gibellins; which two Factions, for a considerable
time after, occasioned great Commotions in Italy: And
tho Frederick behaved himself bravely against the Pope
and his Associates, yet the Popes Excommunication,
had such powerful Influence in that superstitious Age,
that, after the Pope had solemnly deposed him in the
Council held at Lyons, some Princes of Germany did
choose Henry,
         1245. 
         Landgrave of Thuringia their King, who
was commonly called the King of the Priests; but he
dying in the year next following, some Princes declared
William Earl of Holland their King; who was
not able to Establish himself, being opposed by Cunrad,
son of Frederick II. who was appointed to succeed his
Father in the Empire. In the mean time his Father
had been very unsuccessful in Italy, who at last died
in the year 1250. Cunrad having left Germany, retired
into his Hereditary Kingdoms of Naples and sicily,
where he died. 1254. 
         William Earl of Holland was slain
in a battel against the Frizelanders, in the year
1256. 
§ 8. A long inte•regnum. With the death of Frederick II. the Authority
of the German Emperours in Italy was quite extinguished:
And that it might not be revived again, the Pope gave
the Kingdom of Naples to Charles Duke of Anjou, who,
by the Instigation of the Pope, caused the young Cunradin
(who being the son of Cunrad, was come to recover
his Herediatary Kingdom, and taken Prisoner in a
battel fought betwixt them) to be executed by the
hands of the Hangman; with whom was extinguished
the Race of the Dukes of swabia. In the mean time
there were great divisions among the German Princes,
concerning the election of a new Emperour; some of
them had chosen Richard Duke of Cornwal, son of John
King of England, and the rest were for Alfonsus X. 
King of Castile; both were elected in the year 1257. 
Richard came on his Journey as far as the Rhine, to take
possession of the Empire, but, for want of Money, was
forced to return home again: And Alfonsus came not
within the sight of Germany. Then there was a complete
and long vacancy of the Throne in Germany;
during which time there was nothing to be seen but
confusion, every body pretending to be Master. These
Civil Disorders were of the worse consequence, because
that about the same time the three great Families
of the Dukes of swabia, the Marquesses of Austria,
and Landgraves of Thuringia being extinct, a great
many aspired to possess themselves of these Countries. 
To be short, the longest sword was then the best
Title, and he that could master another kept him under
subjection; and robbing and plundering was an allowed
exercise at that time. Against these outrageous
Proceedings several of the Cities upon the Rhine entered
into a Confederacy, with whom a great many
other Princes afterwards joyning their Forces, they
demolished the strong Holds of these Robbers,1255. and
cleared the Highways. § 9. R•d•lph •arl of Habsbu••h At last Rodolph Earl of Habsburgh and Landgrave
of Alsace (from whom are descended the present Arch-Dukes
of Austria) was unanimously chosen Emperour;
who,1273. the better to establish himself in the Throne,

Married his three Daughters to three of the great
Princes of Germany, viz. to Lewis Palatin of the Rhine,
to Albert Duke of saxony, and to Otto Marquess of Brandenburgh. 
After the death of Frederick Marquess of
Austria, who had his Head cut off at Naples, together
with Cunradin, Ottocar the King of Bohemia had
possessed himself of Austria, stiria, Crain, the Windishmarck
and Portenau. But Rodolph, who thought
that his Family had more Right to it having •etaken
these Countries, from Ottocar, gave them in Fief to
his son Albert; and to the second, whose name was
Rodolph, the Dukedom of swabia: Besides this, the
Grandson of Albert got Crain and Tyrol. Thus Rodolph
did by obtaining the Imperial Dignity, raise his House
from a moderate state to great Power and vast Riches. 
But tho he was often invited to come into Italy, yet
he could never be perswaded to it, alledging that old
and notorious saying of the Fox, Quia me vestigia terreat;
because the footsteps deter me. Nay he declared
a great many Cities there Free, for sums of money;
by which the Kingdom of Italy, being first torn into a
great many pieces, was quite lost: But Germany he took
into his particular Care, and destroied a great many Castles
there which served for a retreat for Robbers. He
was the first that introduced the use of the German
Tongue in all Publick Courts and Private Transactions,
whereas formerly the Latin Tongue had been made use
of in the like cases. He dyed in the year 1291. His son Albert did lay claim to the Empire, but by
the Interest of the Archbishop of Mayence,
         Adolph 
         Adolph Earl
of Nassau, who was his kinsman, was chosen Emperour;
the Archbishop being in hopes to have, under
him, the supreme Management of the Affairs; but Adolph
not being willing to depend on the Archbishop,
he conceived a hatred against him. some did think it
unbecoming the grandure of the Emperour, that he engaged
in a League with England against France for a
sum of Mony paid to him by the English; but this
might admit of a very good excuse, since besides this,
the English had promissed the Emperour to assist him
in the recovery of the Kingdom of Arclat, a great part
of which France had, during the Troubles in Germany,
         
taken into its possession. On the other hand France
sided with Albert, who being advanced near the Rhine,
the Archbishop of Mayence did assemble some of the
Electors, who being dissatisfied with Adolph, deposed
him, and chose Albert Emperour in his stead. A bloody
Battel was fought betwixt these two near spires, wherein
Adolph being slain,Albert I. being slain, the Imperial Crown remained to Albert:
But because he aimed at nothing more than to
enrich himself, his Reign was both very unglorious and
unfortunate. His Covetousness was at last the occasion
of his death; for his Nephew John Duke of swabia,
whom he had dispossessed of his Country, murdered him
near Rhinefeld. 
         1308. 
        § 10. After his death, Philip King of France endeavoured
to obtain the Imperial Crown, but was prevented
by the Electors,〈◊〉VII. who, upon the perswasion of
the Pope, chose Henry VII. Earl of Luxemburgh. This
Emperour, after he had setled Germany, undertook a
Journey into Italy, with a resolution to suppress the
Civil Commotions there, and to reestablish the Imperial
Authority. The beginning of this undertaking proved
so prosperous, that every body hoped for great success
from it:〈◊〉 by • Monk. But in the midst of this prosperity he was murthered
by a Monk, who had given him a poisoned Host,
he having been hired by the Florentines, the Emperours
Enemies, to commit this fact. In the year 1313. the Electors were again divided
in the Election of a new Emperour, some having given
their Votes for Lewis Duke of Bavaria,
         〈…〉. the rest for
Frederick Duke of Austria. The first was Crowned at
Aix la Chapelle, the latter at B•nn. These two carried
on a War against each other for the Imperial Crown
during the space of nine years, to the great detriment of
the whole Empire: At last Frederick being made a Prisoner
in a battel fought in the year 1323. Lewis became
sole Master of the Empire, and restored its Tranquility. 
But he afterwards went into Italy, to back
the Gibellines, who were of his side, and tho at first
he was very prosperous, yet could he not settle his Affairs
to any purpose,Exc•mmunic•ted b••••e Pope. because the Pope had Excommunicated
him. Wherefore also the Popes Associates in

         Germany, maugre all his resistance, were always too
hard for him; and at last, by the perswasions of the
Pope, stirred up the Electors against him, who chose
Charles IV. Marquess of Moravia, son of John King
of Bohemia, Emperour in his stead; who nevertheless,
as long as Lewis lived, was not much taken notice of. 
He died in the year 1347. It is to be observed, that
the preceding Emperours used generally to make their
Progress thro' the Empire, and to maintain their Court
out of the Revenues belonging to the Empire: But this
Lewis IV. was the first who kept his constant Court in
his Hereditary Country, and maintained it out of his
own Revenue; whose example the succeeding Emperours
followed, the Revenues belonging to the Empire
having been by degrees extremely diminished. § 11. After the death of Lewis,
         Charles IV. 
          there were some
who would have made void the former Election of
Charles, and had chosen in his stead Edward King of
England, who did not think fit to accept of the Imperial
Dignity: The same was also refused by Frederick
Marquess of Misnia: At last Gunther Earl of
swartzburgh was elected; whom Charles caused to be
poisoned, and by his Liberality established himself in
the Empire. During his Reign he gave away a considerable
part of the Dependencies of the Empire, and
among the rest, he granted to France the perpetual Vicarship
of the Kingdom of Arclat; and in Italy he sold
what he could to the fairest bidder: But he was not
so careless of his Kingdom of Bohemia, unto which he
annexed, among other Countries, that of silesia. He
was a great favourer of the Cities which he dignified
with such Privileges, that they might the better be
able to maintain themselves against the Power of the
Princes: The best thing that ever he did, was, that
he caused first to be compiled the Golden Bull,
         T•e Golden Bull. wherein
were set down the Rules to be observed in the elections
of the ensuing Emperours, and Divisions among the Electors,
prevented for the future. He died in the year 1378. 
having not long before by great Presents made to the Electors,
prevailed with them, to chose his son Wenceslaus
King of the Romans:
         Wenceslaus. 1400. 
          But he being very brutish and careless
of the Affairs of the Empire, was deposed by the

Electors, which he little regarded, but retired into his
Hereditary Kingdom of Bohemia, where he lived for a
considerable time. After Wenceslaus was deposed, Jodocus
Marquess of Moravia was chosen Emperour, but he
happening to die within a few months after, before he
could take possession of the Empire,Fred•rick o• Bru•s•ick. 
         Frederick Duke of
Brunswick was elected in his stead, who, in his Journey
to Francfort was, by instigation of the Archbishop
of Mayence,
         Rupert. murthered by the Earl of Waldeck. At
last Rupert, Palatin of the Rhine was chosen Emperour;
who Reigned with great applause in Germany; but his
Expedition into Italy proved fruitless. He died in the
year 1410. § 12. sigismund. After the death of Rupert, sigismund King of
Hungary, Brother to Wenceslaus, was made Emperour;
a Prince endowed with great Qualities, but very unfortunate
in his wars, having, before he obtained the
Imperial Crown, received a great defeat from the Turks
near Cogrelis; which was occasioned by the too much
heat and forwardness of the French Auxiliaries. He caused
John Huss,
         1393. notwithstanding the safe Conduct granted
him, to be burnt at the Council of Constance; whose
death his adherents, who called themselves Hussites, did
revenge with great fury upon Bohemia and Germany;
this War having taken up the greatest part of his Reign. 
He died in the year 1437. After him succeeded his son-in-Law Albert II. Albert II. 
          Duke
of Austria, and King of Hungary and Bohemia, who did
not Reign a whole year. He died in the year 1439. 
whilst he was very busie in making preparations against
the Turks. 
         Fredrick III
          Him succeeded his kinsman Frederick III. 
Duke of Austria; since which time all the succeeding
Emperours have been of this House. During his Reign
several disturbances were raised in Germany, which were
neglected by the Emperour. He also had some differences
with Ladislaus, son of Albert II. concerning
Austria, and was attacked by Matthias Hunniades King
of Hungary; which war he prosecuted with more patience
than vigour. He died in the year 1493. Him
succeeded his son Maximilian I. Maximilian I. 
          who had the good

fortune by his Marriage with Mary the Daughter of
Charles the Hardy Duke of Burgundy, to annex the Netherlands
to the House of Austria. As he was very
fickle in his undertakings, so the success was generally
answerable to it and various; and his Wars with the
switzers, and those in Italy against the Venetians had
but a very indifferent end: The chiefest thing of moment
done by him, is, that whereas formerly all differences
in Germany were decided by the sword, he reestablished
the Peace of the Empire. He died in the year
1519. § 13. Charles V. 
          Him succeeded his Grandson Charles V. King
of spain and sovereign of the Netherlands; under whose
Reign the face of Affairs in Germany was remarkably
changed; which was occasioned by the Religious Differences
set on foot about that time: For the Pope
had caused Indulgences to be sold here in so scandalous
a manner, that the wiser sort began to be ashamed
of it. 1517. Wherefore Martin Luther Doctor of Divinity
and Professor in the University of Wittenbergh, held
a publick Disputation against it;The Reformation. wh• being opposed by
others, all the neighbouring Countries were alarmed at
it. Luther at first did submit himself to the decision
of the Pope, but finding that he favoured the Indulgence
Merchants, and that he was condemned by him, he appealed
to a free General Council, and then began to
go farther, to examine the Popes Authority; and having
laid open some Errours and Abuses which were
crept in among them, his Doctrine was so approved of
by some of the Princes and free Imperial Cities, that
they began to banish the Priests and Monks out of several
places, and to reduce their Revenues. And tho
the Emperour did declare Luther,
         1521. at the Dyet of Worms,
an Out-Law, and endeavoured by several Proclamations
to put a stop to these Proceedings and Innovations;
nevertheless, the Emperour being then engaged in a
war with France, and therefore not in a capacity to
apply himself in good earnest to the suppressing of this
Division▪ 
         Luthers Party grew daily stronger. Perhaps he was afterwards not very sorry, to see the
wound encrease, that he might make the better benefit

of the Cure; there having been a Proclamation published
at the Dyet of spiers,
         1529. which was in no ways
agreeable to the Lutheran Princes, they protested against
the same,The Rise of the Name of Protestants. from whence they are called Protestants. 
In the year next following they delivered a Confession
of their Faith to the Emperour at Augsburgh, and entered
into a Defensive Alliance at smalkald;
         1530. which
League was renewed in the year 1535. The League at smalkald
          when a great
many Princes and Free Imperial Cities were received
into it. This League made at smalkald was a great
eye-sore to the Emperour, who used all means to dissolve
the same: But the Protestants, who now began
to trust to their own strength, standing by one another,
the Hostilities began on both sides, and the Protestants
did bring into the Field an Army of 100000 Men,1546. 
under the Conduct of John Frederick Elector of saxony,
and Philip Landgrave of Hesse. If they had fal'n immediately
upon the Emperour, whose Forces were then
not joined, they might in all probability have worsted
him; but having lost the first opportunity, the Emperour
strengthened himself, that he forced the Protestants to
quit the Field and to disband their Forces. He also
caused a diversion to be given the Elector at home by
his Kinsman Maurice, which had such influence upon
the Free Imperial Cities, that they were obliged to
submit themselves and to pay considerable Fines. In
the year next following the Emperour fell into saxony,
and having defeated the Elector near Michlbergh,
took him prisoner; against whom he pronounced sentence
of Death, which however he changed into an
Imprisonment. Philip Landgrave of Hesse having also
submitted himself, was, contrary to agreement, made
a Prisoner; whereby the Protestant Religion in Germany
was reduced to great extremity. The Electorat
of saxony was given to Maurice Duke of saxony, who
at last being resolved not to permit any longer that both
the Religion and Liberty should be quite destroied,
neither that his Wifes Father the Landgrave of Hesse,
who upon his Parole had surrendred himself to the Emperour,
should be detained a Prisoner, fell so suddenly
with his Forces upon the Emperour, that he was very
near having surprised his Person at Inspruck. 
         1552. 
         Henry II. 
King of France having also made an Inroad on the other

side of Germany, surprized Metz, Tullie, and Verdun. 
King Ferdinand therefore the Emperours Brother
interposing his Authority,A Peace concluded. a Peace was concluded at
Passau; where their Religion was secured to the Protestants,
till matters could be better setled at the next
ensuing Dyet. 1552. The Landgrave was released; as likewise
John Frederick the Elector, who was dismissed out
of prison a little before by the Emperour. 1555. At last the
Religious Peace in Germany was established, at the Dyet
at Augsburgh, where it was provided, that neither Party
should annoy one another under the pretext of Religion,
and that such of the Church Lands and Revenues,
as the Protestants had been possessed of before
the Peace concluded at Passau, should remain in their
possession. An Insurrection of the Boors. The Boors also in Germany raised a most
dangerous Rebellion under the Reign of Charles V:
of whom there were killed above 100000. 1525. In the year
1529. the City of Vienna was besieged by solyman the
Turkish Emperour, but to no purpose, he being obliged to
raise the siege,1532. not without considerable loss: And afterwards
the Turks who were marching with a great Army
into Austria, were beaten back again. In the year 1534. 
the Anabaptists were for erecting a new Kingdom in
Munster in Westphalia, under the Conduct of John, a
Taylor of Leiden, and one Knipperdolling; who received
the dire Reward of their madness. He Resign. At last this great
Prince Charles V. surrendered the Imperial Dignity to
his Brother Ferdinand I. Ferdinand I. 
          King of Hungary and Bohemia,
who united these two Kingdoms to the House of Austria,
he having Married Anna sister of Lewis King of Hungary
and Bohemia, who was slain in the battel fought against
the Turks near Mohatz. He Reigned very peaceably in Germany,
and died in the year 1564. Maximilian II. 
          Him succeeded his son
Maximilian II. who also Reigned in peace, except that
a Tumult happened at that time in Germany, raised by
one William Grumpach and his Associates, who having
first murthered Melchior Zobel the Archbishop of Wartzburgh,
had plundered that City; they also endeavoured
to stir up the Nobility and to raise disturbances in other
places. 1567. This man having been declared an Outlaw, was
protected by John Frederick Duke of saxony, who paid
dearly for it, Gotha, one of his best strong Holds having
been demolished, and he himself taken Prisoner▪ 
         Maximilian
         
died in the year 1576. R•dolph II. 
          Him succeded his son
Rudolph II. who Reigned also very peaceably in Germany,
except that the Hungarian Wars did now and then keep
the Germans a little in exercise; and that in the year 1609. 
the right of succession in the Country of Juliers was
brought in question. At last his Brother Mathias, Arch-Duke
of Austria grew impatient to possess his Brothers
Inheritance before his death,1612. to him Rudolphus surrendered
Hungary and Bohemia, and at his death he left
him his other Countries and the Imperial Crown. § 14. Under the Reign of Matthias,
         Matthias. the ill Humours
did so encrease by degrees in Germany, that towards his
latter days they caused violent Convulsions. The origin
of this war, which lasted thirty years, was this: In
the Religious Peace formerly concluded at Passau, two
Parties were only included, viz. the Roman Catholicks,
and those who adhered to the Augsburgh Confession,Origin of the German Wars. 
the free exercise of Religion being forbidden to all others. 
But some of the states of the Empire, among whom
the chiefest were the Elector Palatin and the Landgrave
of Hesse Cassel, having since that time received the
Reformed Religion, commonly called the Calvinian,
the Roman Catholicks were against their enjoying the
benefit of the Religious Peace. These on the other
hand alledged, that they did belong, as well as the
rest, to the Augsburgh Confession, and that the whole
difference did only consist in some few passages: But
the rest of the Protestants who strictly adhered to the
Words of the Augsburgh Confession, were not for receiving
them into the same Communion, yet it was
their opinion, that they ought not to be prosecuted for
the differences that were betwixt them. But afterwards
these controverted Articles were by the heat of the
Priests explained in so different a manner, that the name
of a Calvinist became as odious to some Protestants, as
that of a Roman Catholick. The Roman Catholicks taking
hold of this opportunity, caressed the old Protestants,
especially those in the Electorate of saxony,
unto whom they represented the Calvinists as a Generation
equally destructive to both Parties; whereby
they hoped to disjoyn them from the rest, and after
they had destroied them, to make the easier work with

the rest of the Protestants. These therefore of the
Reformed Religion, entered into a Confederacy for
their common security; into which there having
been received a great many other Protestant Princes,
it was called the Evangelical Ʋnion. 
         Th• Evangelical Union. In opposition to
this Confederacy, the Roman Catholicks made an Alliance
among themselves, which they called the Catholick
League, whose Head was the Duke of Bavaria, a
constant Rival of the Elector Palatin. There happened
also some other matters which had exasperated both
Parties, viz. that the Protestants had reduced a great
many Church Revenues, after the Peace at Passau;
that the Cities of Aix la Chapelle, and Donawerth, had
been very hardly dealt withal, and some other matters,
which were manifest proofs of the Animosities of both
Parties against one another. § 15. The Bohemian Tumults. Both Parties being thus exasperated and prepared
for War, did administer fuel to that flame
which quickly after broke out in the Kingdom of
Bohemia. The Bohemians pretended, that the Emperour
Matthias had taken from them their Privileges,
and having raised a Tumult, did throw three Persons
of Quality, who spoke in the Emperours behalf, out
of the Castle Windows;1618. and immediatly after entered
with an Army into Austria: In the mean while
Matthias died,Fer•inand I
          whose Nephew Ferdinand (who also
succeeded him in the Empire) the Bohemians had before
his death received for their King; but now, under
pretence that he had broken the Contract made
betwixt him and the Estates,T•e Crown of Bohemia offered to the Electo• 
           Palatin. 
          had renounced Ferdinand,
and offered the Crown to Frederick Elector Palatin. 
This young Prince was perswaded by some of his
Friends, who were of an unsettled spirit, and not
diving deep enough into a business of such Consequence,
to accept of this offer, before he had laid a foundation
for such an undertaking: For the Bohemians
themselves were fickle and unfaithful, Bethlem Gabor
Inconstant. England was not for medling in the
matter; Holland was very backward in giving assistance. 
The Union which they chiefly relied upon, was a
Body with a great many Heads, without vigour, or

any constant Resolution. Besides this, France did endeavour
to dissolve this League, as being not willing
that the Elector Palatin and the rest of the Reformed
Religion, should grow too potent; for fear, that in
time they might afford their assistance to the Hugonots,
whose destruction was then in agitation at the French
Court. In the beginning of this War the Affairs of
Ferdinand looked with an ill Aspect; because Bethlem
Gabor, Duke of Transilvania, fell into Hungary,
in hopes to become Master of that Kingdom; and
there were also great discontents among his subjects
in Austria: but he having recovered himself by the
Alliance made with the Duke of Bavaria,
         The ill succes• of the Elector Palatin. 
          the Elector
Palatin lost, with that unfortunate Battel fought
on the white Hill near Prague, at once all his former
advantages: For Ferdinand soon after reduced Bohemia,
         1620. 
         Moravia, and silesia to obedience. spinola made an
inroad into the Lower Palatinat, which was deserted
by the Forces of the League. The Duke of Bavaria
got the Ʋpper Palatinat and the Electoral Dignity. The
Elector of saxony, who had been very instrumental in
reducing of silesia, had for his reward Lusatia, in Fief
of the Kingdom of Bohemia. 
        In the mean time the Marquess of Durlach,
         Th• War spread in Ge•ma•y. 
          
         Christian
Duke of Brunswick, the Earl of Mansfield, and some
others who were of the Elector Palatins Party, marched
with their Armies up and down the Country, and the
Emperour, under pretence of pursuing them, sent his
Forces into all parts of the Empire. Against these
the Circle of the Lower saxony armed itself, having
made Christian IV. King of Denmark, General of that
Circle: But he having received a great overthrow
near Kings Lutter,
         1626. from Tilly the Imperial General,
the Emperour over-run all the Lower saxony; and having
obliged King Christian to make Peace with him
at Lubeck▪
         
         1629. he began to get footing near the Coast of
the Baltick. 
         The Procl•
           mation concerning Churc• Lan•s. 
        § 16. The Emperour by this success being arrived
to such a pitch of Greatness, that he did not
question but for the future to be absolute in Germany;
         1629. 
         
did publish a Proclamation, enjoining the Protestants
to restore to the Catholicks all such Church Lands
or Revenues, as were taken from them since the Peace
made at Passau. Under this pretence he hoped quickly
to subdue the rest of the Protestant Princes, not questoning
but that the Catholick Estates would easily be
forced to submit themselves to his pleasure. The Protestants, 'tis true, entered into a Defensive
Alliance at Leipsick, but wi•hout any great prospect of
success,Gustavus A•olphus. if Gustavus Adolphus, King of sweedland had
not come to their assistance. This King was induced
to enter Germany, partly because the preservation of
his own state seemed to depend on the Emperours
not getting firm footing on the Baltick, partly because
several of the German Princes had craved his assistance,
partly also because the Emperour had assisted the Poles
against him in Prussia, and he stood in a good corespondency
with France and Holland, who were very
jealous at the Greatness of the House of Austria. 
         1630. This
King came with an Army into Germany, and drove
the Imperial Forces out of Pomerania and the neighbouring
Countries. In the mean time the Imperial
General Tilly had quite destroied the City of Magdeburgh,
and was upon his march against the Elector
of saxony, whom he did not question but to rout quickly:
But King Gustavus having joined his Forces with
those of the Elector of saxony, defeated Tilly, in that
eminent Battel near Leipsick; where the Emperour at
one stroke lost all his hopes which he had conceived
from the happy success of his Arms during the space
of twelve years before. From thence he marched on
to the Rhine, where he made almost miraculous progresses;
but because the Elector of saxony had not so
vigorously attacked the Hereditary Countries of the
Emperour, he had thereby leisure given him to raise
another Army,1632. under the Conduct of Wallenstein;
against whom the King lay encamped for a considerable
time near Nurenbergh; and afterwards in the battel
of Lutzen,
         Gustavus'•
           D••th. tho his side gained the Victory, he lost his
life. 
After his death his Generals and Confederates
carried on the war,Th• Wa• continue•. under the Conduct of Axel
Oxenstem, Chancellour of sweden, with indifferent
good success; but having received an entire defeat
in the battel near Noringen, which they fought
without necessity, they lost all their Conquests. The
Elector of saxony having also concluded a peace with
the Emperour at Prague,
         1634. which was extremely disliked
by the Protestant Party;1635. the Emperour was now
again in hopes to drive the swedes by force out of Germany:
But by the valour and conduct of their Generals
the swedish Affairs began to look with a better face,
who carried the War again into the very Hereditary
Countries of the Emperour. At last all parties began
to incline to a peace; for the Emperour and the Princes
of Germany were tired out with the war; France
began to be divided at home by Commotions; Holland
had made a separate peace with spain; and the swedes
feared that the Germans, of whom was composed the
greatest part of their Army, might at last grow weary
of being instrumental in the Ruin of their native Country,
or that one unfortunate blow might chance to rob
them of the Fruits of their former Victories; a Peace
was therefore concluded at Osnabrugge with sweden,
and at Munster with France;
         Peace of Osn••rugge and France. 
          by virtue of which the
swedes got a part of Pomerania, Bremen, and Wismas, and
five Millions of Crowns for the payment of their Forces. 1648. 
         France kept Brisac, suntgaw, a part of Alsace and Philipsbourg. 
By this Peace the Authority of the states
of Germany and the Protestant Religion were Established
at once; and the Emperours Power confined within
such Bounds, that he could not easily hereafter attempt
any thing against either of them; especially since
both sweden and France had a free passage left them,
from whence they might easily oppose him,1637. if he designed
to transgress these Limits. During this war
died Ferdinand II. Ferdinand t•e Third. whom succeeded his son Ferdinand
III. who died in the year 1657. In whose stead
was, in the year next following, elected Emperour his
son Leopold. 
        
§ 19. Leopold. After the Westphalian Peace Germany remained
in peace for a considerable time, except that the
Emperour and Elector of Brandenburgh (at which time
the swedes were engaged in a War with Denmark)
fell into Pomerania;
         1659. but these differences were composed
by the peace made at Oliva. In the year 1663. 
a war began with the Turks;
         War with the Turk
          when the Turks took
New•eusel; but were also, especially near st. Godhart;
soundly beaten. some are of opinion, that if the Emperour
had at that time vigorously purs•ed his Victory,
he might have beaten them out of Hungary; since the
Turks were put into a great consternation by the Persians,
and some Rebellious Bassa's, and the Venetians
did so vigorously push on the siege of Canea: But the
Emperour was so forward in making peace with them,
because, as it is supposed, he was jealous of France. 
And in the year 1672. Germany was again entangled
in a war with France;
         War with France. 
          which was occasioned by the
great progresses of the French against the Hollanders, who
were relieved by the Emperour and the Elector of Brandenburgh:
For tho in the year before the Emperour had
made an Alliance with France, whereby he had promised,
not to meddle in the War if France should attack
one of the Triple Alliance; nevertheless he sent
his Forces towards the Rhine, under pretence that it belonged
to him as being Emperour, to take effectual care,
that the flame which was burning in the neighbouring
Countries, might not prove destructive to Germany: And
the Elector of Brandenburgh made heavy complaints,
that the French had made great havock in his Territories
of Cleves. The French on the other side sent an
Army towards Germany, in hopes to oblige the Emperour
not to concern himself in this War; but the
French having not only committed great outrages in the
Empire, but also taken into possession the City of Treves,
and made great havock in the Palatinat, the Emperor
perswaded the states of the Empire to declare war against
France. sweden was also afterwards engaged in
the same war;Peace of Nim•e••n▪
           
          which was ended by the peace made
at Nimwegen;
         1679. whereby France got Friburgh in Bris
           •an,
in lieu of Philipsburgh; and sweden was restored

to those Provinces which it had lost during the
war. § 18. The Genius o• this Nation. If we duly consider the Genius of this Nation,
which inhabits this great Empire, it is most evident,
that this Nation ever since the memory of Men has
been very brave, and addicted to War; and that Germany
has been an inexhaustible source of souldiers,
since there is scarce ever any want of Men, who are
ready to serve for Money: and if they are once well
Disciplined, they are not only good at the first onset,
but are very fit to endure the hardships and inconveniences
of a long war. There are not in any other Nation
so many to be met withal, that are ready to list
themselves in Foreign service for Money; neither •is
there any Country in Christendom where greater Forces
both of Horse and Foot may be raised, than in Germany
But besides this, the Germans are much addicted
and very fit for Commerce, and all sorts of Handycrafts
Trade; and not only the Inhabitants of the Cities
do apply themselves with great industry to the same;
but also if a Countryman gets a little beforehand in
the World, he puts his son to some Handycraft's Trade
or another, tho a great many of them afterwards run
into the Wars. They are generally very free and honest,
very ambitious to maintain the so much praised
Fidelity of the antient Germans; they are not easily
stirred up to raise Tumults, but commonly are willing
to remain under the same Government where they are
Educated. § 19. Tho the German Empire has no Possessions
abroad,Nature of 〈◊〉 soil. except you would account Hungary to be such;
which is under subjection to the House of Austria;
nevertheless it is a Country of a vast extent by it self,
which is full of great and small Cities, Towns and
Villages: The Ground is very Fertile in general, there
being very few spots to be met withal of any large extent,
which do not produce something or another for
the sustenance of Mankind; so that there is every where
great plenty of all sorts of Provisions. Germany also
abounds in all sorts of Minerals, especially in Mines

of silver,Its Commodities. Copper, Tin, Lead, Iron, Mercury, and other
sorts. It has abundance of springs that furnish waters
for the boyling of salt: and those several great Navigable
Rivers wherewith it is adorned, make it very commodious
to transport its Commodities from one place to another. 
The Commodities of Germany are these; v•z. 
Iron, and all sorts of Instruments made of it, Lead,
Mercury, Wine, Corn, Beer, Wooll, course Cloth,
all sorts of Linnen and Woollen Manufactories, Horses,
sheep, &c. If therefore the Germans would apply
themselves to imitate these Manufactories at home,
which are now Imported by Foreigners, or else would
be contented with their own, and not make use of
Foreign Manufactories, those Commodities which are
Exported out of Germany, would much surpass these
which are Imported; and therefore it would of necessity
grow very Rich, especially since a considerable
quantity of silver is digged out of the Mines there. § 20. Form of Government As for the Form of Government in Germany,
it is to be considered, that it is not like some Kingdoms,
where the Kings have the whole Power in their
hands, and according to whose commands the subjects
are obliged to comport themselves; neither is the sovereign
Power here circumscribed within certain bounds,
as it is in some Kingdoms of Europe, where the Kings
cannot exercise an absolute sovereignty without the
consent of the Estates: But Germany has its particular
Form of Government, the like is not to be met withal
in any Kingdom of Europe, except that the antient
Form of Government in France came pretty near it. 
Germany acknowledges but one supreme Head, under
the Title of the Roman Emperour; which Title did at
first imply no more than the sovereignty over the City
of Rome, and the Protection of the Church of Rome
and her Patrimony. This Dignity was first annexed
to the German Empire by Otto I. but it is long ago
since the Popes have robbed the Kings of Germany
of this Power, and only have left them the bare Name. 
But besides this, the Estates of Germany, some of which
have great and potent Countries in their possession,
have a considerable share of the sovereignty over their

subjects; and tho they are Vassals of the Emperour
and Empire, nevertheless they ought not to be considered
as subjects, or only as potent or rich Citizens
in a Government; for they are actually possessed of the
supreme Jurisdiction in Criminal Affairs; they have
power to make Laws and to regulate Church Affairs,
(which however is only to be understood of the Protestants)
to dispose of the Revenues arising out of their own
Territories; to make Alliances, as well among themselves
as with Foreign states, provided the same are
not intended against the Emperour and Empire; they may
build and maintain Fortresses and Armies of their own,
Coin Mony, and the like. This grandeur of the Estates,
'tis true, is a main obstacle that the Emperour cannot
make himself absolute in the Empire, except it be in
his Hereditary Countries; yet this has been always observed,
the more potent the Emperour is, the more he
has exercised his Authority, and the Estates have been
forced to comply with his commands: and it is certain,
that the grandure of the Estates, except what is contained
in the Golden Bull concerning the Electoral
Dignity, was more founded upon antient Customs and
Precedents, than any real Constitutions; till in the
Westphalian Peace their Rights and Authority have been
expresly and particularly confirmed and established. § 21. stren•th and weakn•ss of this Empire. Tho it is certain that Germany within itself
is so Potent, that it might be formidable to all its
Neighbours, if its strength was well united an rightly
emploied; nevertheless this strong Body has also its
infirmities, which weaken its strength, and slacken
its vigour: its irregular Constitution of Government is
one of the chief causes of its Distemper; it being neither
one entire Kingdom, neither properly a Confederacy,
but participating of both kinds: For the
Emperour has not the entire sovereignty over the whole
Empire, nor each Estate in particular over his Territories;
and the former is more than a bare Administrator,
yet the latter have a greater share in the sovereignty
than can be attributed to any subjects or Citizens
whatever, tho never so great. And this seems to be
the reason why at last the Emperours did quit their

pretensions upon Italy, and the Kingdom of Arclat;
because these potent Princes of Germany,
         Wh• the Emperour quitted the Kingdom of Arclat. 
          and the turbulent
Bishops, who were continually stirred up by the
Popes, used to give them so much work, that they had
enough to do to take care of Germany as the main
stake, without being able to concern themselves much
about other parts. Yet do I not find any instances
in History, that any of the antient Emperours did endeavour
to subdue the Princes, and to make himself
absolute Master of Germany. But this ambitious Design
Charles V. as it seems, was first put upon by the spaniards,
or, as some will have it, by Nicolas Pereno•
Granvel. And truly the Electors had the same reasons
not to have admitted him to the Imperial Dignity,
as they had not to admit Francis I. King of France:
And common Reason tells us,What is the Interest of the Electors. that no Nation that
has the Power of Electing a Prince, ought to choose
such a one as if possessed before of a considerable Hereditary
Estate, that he may think it his Interest to
take more care of that than the Elective Kingdom:
For he either will certainly be very ca••less of the Interest
of the Elective Kingdom, or else he will make
the Interest of the Elective Kingdom subservient to
that of his Hereditary Countries, and make use of the
strength of the first to maintain the latter, and render
it more Powerful; or else he will endeavour, by making
himself sovereign over the Elective Kingdom, to
make it dependent on his Hereditary Estate. Germany
found all these three inconveniencies by experience,
under the Reign of this Emperour;The Conduct of Charles. 
          for he came very
seldom into Germany, and that only en passant: He
never made the true Interest of Germany the Rule of
his Designs, but all was carried on for the grandeur
and increase of his House; and at last, under pretence
of Religion, he attempted to suppress entirely the antient
Liberty of the Estates. On the contrary, if Germany
had an Emperour at that time who had not been
possessed of any Countries, or at least an inconsiderable
part without the Empire, the true Interest of the
Empire would have been his Rule; and it would have
been his business not to side with either of these two
Potent and couragious Nations of the French and spaniards,
         
but to have looked upon them like an Arbitrator,
and whilst they had been fighting together to have,
according to the circumstances of Affairs, sometimes
ballanced one, sometimes another, so that one might
not become Master of the other; and thereby gain such
advantages, as might prove prejudicial to Germany:
For it is a far different case, whether I come in betwixt
two Parties as a Mediator, or whether I am
engaged to one certain Party: For in the first Case,
I can engage my self as deep as I think fit, and at least
take care to come off harmless; but in the latter case
I must needs be a loser, let things go how they will,
and at last another shall reap the Fruits of my Labour. And to give a specious Colour to these Consequences,Of the Ga•
           ranties of the Circle of Bur•undy. 
         
so perjudicial to Germany, Charles V. did gain this
Point, at the Dyet of Augsburgh, upon the Estates, at
that time,1548. when having brought the Protestants very
low, no body durst oppose it, that they should take upon
them the Guarantie of the Circle of Burgundy;
whereby Germany was obliged to be always engaged
in the Wars betwixt spain and France, and with its
Treasure and Men to assist the spaniards in the defence
of the Netherlands. I must confess, that it is not the
Interest of Germany, to see these Countries fall altogether
into the hands of France; nevertheless it is not absolutely
necessary that the Estates in Germany should
Ruin themselves for their sake; since there are others
also, who are better able, and have the same Interest
that Germany has, to preserve these Provinces. The
attempt which Charles V. made against the Protestant
Religion in Germany, was a true spanish Design: For not
to mention here the notorious Falsities in the Roman Catholick
Religion, I cannot for my life see, what could move
the Emperour, if his aim had been for the sole Interest of
the Empire, to act contrary to the general Inclination of
the Nation, and not rather to take hold of this so favourable
opportunity, to free himself from the Tyranny
of the Popes, who for several Ages together had trampled
upon the German Empire; and with the superfluous
Church-Lands, to encrease his own, and the
Revenues of the Empire, or at least to give liberty to
the Bishops to Marry without quitting their Church

Benefices. If the Emperour would have given a helping
hand, the Reformation would have been as easily
setled in Germany, as it was in sweden, England and
Denmark
        After these spanish states Maxims had lain a while
dormant,Ferdinand pursu•s th• 
           spanish M•xims. they were at last revived, and that with more
vigour, under the Reign of Ferdinand II. besides a great
deal of misery which did from thence accrue to Germany:
this was the cause that the Estates of Germany, to
preserve their Liberty, were obliged to seek for Foreign
Aid, by which means they maintained their Liberty;
but it had been questionless more advantageous to Germany,
not to have wanted the assistance of Foreigners,
who were not forgetful to make their own advantage
by it. Now if it may be supposed, that there are some
remnants of the spanish Leaven, it may easily be conjectured,
what jealousie and distrusts must be betwixt
the Members of the Empire, and how contrary and different
their Counsels and Actions must needs be: and
tho perhaps by setling a good understanding betwixt
the supreme Head and Estates, a medium might be
found out to obviate this and some other inconveniencies,
yet the•e reign various and great Distempers
amongst the Estates themselves, which seem to render
the best Remedies and Counsels either ineffectual, or
at least very difficult: Among these must be counted
the Religious Differences betwixt the Catholicks and
the Protestants in general; which Differences do not
only depend on the several Opinions in Matters of
Faith, but also on a Worldly Interest; the Catholicks
endeavouring upon all occasions to recover such Possessions
as were taken from them since the Reformation;
and the Protestants being resolved to maintain themselves
in the Possession of them. Wherefore it has been
observed, that sometimes the Roman Catholicks have
been more guided by their particular Interest, and by
their Clergy, than by that of the Publick. Nay, it
is to be feared, that if Germany should be vigorously
attacked by a potent Foreign Enemy, that some of the
Popish Bigots would not be so backward in submitting
themselves under the yoke, and be willing to lose
one Eye, provided the Protestants might lose both. 
Beside, the Protestants are again sub-divided into
two Parties;T•• difference betw•xt h• Protestants. there being among them some differences
concerning several Articles of Faith; which, by the
heat of the Clergy, were widened to that degree,
that both Parties were brought to the very brink of
Ruin. The great number of Estates augments the
Distemper, it being next to an impossibility, that among
so many, there should not be some, who either prompted
by their passions, obstinacy, or for want of Understanding,
may not deviate from the true Interest,
or be misled by ill Counsellours to act against the same;
so that it would be a miracle to see so many Heads not
well united. The Estates are also very unequal in Power;
from whence it often happens, that some of the most
Potent are for being like sovereigns, and therefore being
inclined rather to act according to their particular
Interest and Grandeur than for the Publick, they make
little account how they Ruin the less powerful. These
therefore, when they see that the Laws cannot protect
them, are at last obliged to take more care of
their own preservation, than of the Publick Liberty,
as thinking it indifferent by whom they are oppressed. 
Not to mention here, the jealousies which is betwixt
the three Colleges of the Empire, and the several pretensions
and differences which are among some of the
Estates: I could wish that I could find out as easie a
remedy against these and some other the like Diseases,
as I have enumerated them, and demonstrated their
pernicious Consequences. § 22 As to the Neighbours of Germany,
         〈…〉 the Turks
border upon stiria, Croatia, and Hungary: The two
last do not properly belong to Germany, but yet
belong to the House of Austria, and are like a Bulwork
to it; so that Germany is much concerned in the preservation
of them. The Turkish Emperour has greater
Revenues out of his vast Territories, and perhaps is
able to raise a greater number of Men than the Germans
can do; nevertheless he is not so formidable to
them: for the Hungarian Wars are very troublesom
to the Turks;
         T•e Turks. because the Asiatick Forces, and other
supplies of Provision and Ammunition, are not without

great difficulty carried so far; neither can these Forces
be put into Winter Quarters there, as being not used
to so cold a Climate, the neighbouring depopulated
Provinces being also not able to maintain them. The
Turks also are in continual fear, that, as soon as they
have bent their whole Force against Hungary, the Persians
may fall upon them on the other side, or some of
the Bassa's towards the East Revolt from them. And
a well Disciplined Army of Germans, will scarce shrink
before all the Turkish Forces; and when Germany is
resolved to stand the brunt, the Turks will, I believe,
qu•ckly be weary of attacking it. Italy. 
         Italy is in no ways
to be compared with Germany either for its strength or
number of Men, besides that it is divided into several
states, by which it is disabled to attack any Foreign
state, much less so Potent an Empire, which being
possessed of some Passes leading into Italy, might in
time take an opportunity to renew its pretensions upon
that Country. The switzers are very good Neighbours to Germany,
         •h• swisse. 
as having neither will nor power to attack it, especially
since they are destitute of good Horsemen: Neither
can Poland compare its strength with Germany;
         Poland. for tho
the Poles can bring a great number of Horse into the
Field, yet they are not to be compared with the German
Horse, much less their Foot, to the German Infantry:
wherefore the Poles cannot undertake any considerable
and if the Poles should enter into an Alliance with another
Prince, and make a diversion to the Germans, by
falling upon the back of them, it would not be difficult
for the Germans to be even with them; since they are
not well provided with Frontier Places, or any strong
Holds within the Country which are able to withstand
an Enemy; whereas in Germany they would meet with
Places which would give them sufficient work: And
in such a case perhaps the Muscovites might easily be
prevailed withal to fall vpon the back of them: but it
is not to be supposed, that such a Commonwealth as
this will easily attempt an offensive War against its
Neighbours; yet it is of great consequence to Germany,
that Poland may not be brought under subjection
to the Turks, or any other Power. And these
two Nations are able to do one another considerable

services, if they would with their Joint-Forces attack
the Turks. 
        Denmark has no pretensions upon Germany,
         Denmark. and the
best Land-Forces of the Danes being Listed in Germany,
their Army may be Ruined, only by the Emperours recalling
the Germans out of that service, if they should
attempt any thing against the Empire. Neither do I
believe that Germany, but especially the Circles of the
Higher and Lower saxony, will be so careless of their
own Interest, as to let Denmark become master of Hamborough
and Lubeck. 
        England cannot do any harm to Germany,
         Englan•. except by
disturbing the Trade of Hamburgh; tho it seems to be
the Interest of the English, rather to enjoy the benefit
of their Free Trade there. On the other hand, the
Germans may do a service to the English against the
Hollanders, by Land, whilst these are engaged with them
in a War at sea. Holland has neither power nor inclination to attack
Germany:
         Holla•d. For if the Germans should be recalled out
of the service of the Dutch, their Land-Forces would
make but a very indifferent show: Neither can they
reap any benefit by making new Conquests; but it
seems rather to be for their purpose to keep fair with
the Germans, that in case of a War with their Neighbours,
they may make use of their assistance. spain cannot pretend to do any considerable mischief
to Germany,
         sp•i•. if the Head and Members are well united;
but if it should joyn with the Head against the Members
it may prove mischievous, especially by the assistance
of their Money: but in such a case there would
questionless not be wanting some that would oppose
its designs. swedeland alone is not so powerful as to be in any
ways formidable to Germany;
         sweden. neither is this Kingdom
for making any more Conquests on that side, since thereby
it would lose more of its own strength, than it
can gain by them: but on the other hand, it is of
great Consequence to sweden, that the state of Religion
and of the Government, remain in the same condition
as it was setled in the Westphalian Peace; neithat
Germany be subjected or ruled by any absolute
Power. France has of late made itself so Powerful,France. that this
Kingdom alone may do more mischief to the Germans,
than any of the rest of their Neighbours. France, in
consideration of its Form of Government, has a considerable
advantage over Germany; for the King there
has all the best Men, and the Purses of his subjects at
command, and employs them as he thinks fit: But
however such is the strength of Germany, that if well
united, it need not much dread France; for Germany
is capable of raising as numerous, if not more numerous
Armies, than France, and may as easily recruit
them: Besides this, the German souldiers (every thing
duly considered) will scarce turn their backs to the
French. There might also be a way found out, for
Germany to keep always a sufficient Army on foot
against France; at least it is not easily to be supposed,
that if France should attack Germany in good earnest,
all the rest of Europe would be lookers on: but if Germany
be divided within it self, so that either one Party
should join with France, whilst some others stand Neuters,
till France has devoured some of the Neighbouring
states, then nothing but fatal Consequences can attend
it. "
"14","CHAP. IX. Of DENMARK. § 1. 〈…〉 Kingdom. 
         DENMARK is one of the most antient
Kingdoms in Europe, which was Established
a great many years before the Birth
of our saviour, but for want of good Histories it cannot
be precisely determined at what time it had its
beginning, nor how long each of its antient Kings
Reigned, or what were there great Deeds. We will
not therefore detain the Reader by inserting here there
bare Names, but only to touch upon such matters as
are with some certainty transmitted to Posterity. Among
the most antient Kings,〈◊〉III. 
         Frotho III. is most famous,
who, 'tis said, did Reign just before the Birth of
Christ, and was a most Potent Monarch, who Ruled over
Denmark, sweden, Norway, England, Ireland, and other
Neighbouring states. The Borders of his Territories
were on the East-side Russia, and on the West-side
the Rhine. 'Tis also related, that he Conquered the
Vandals, which lived then in these Countries that
now are called Pomerania and Mecklenburgh, and that
he was the first King that stiled himself King of the
Vandals. Gotrick 'tis said, did assist Wittekind, the
King of the saxons, against Charles the Great. Erick is commonly reckoned to have been the first
Christian King of Denmark (tho some pretend,Eric• I. that his
Brother Herald,
         846. who Reigned before him, was the first. )
Under this Kings Reign the Christian Religion was
propagated in Denmark by the help of Ansgarius, then
Bishop of Bremen; which afterwards King Gormo II. 
endeavouring to root out again, was forced by the Emperour
Henry, sumamed the Bird Ketcher, to grant the
free Exercise of the Christian Religion throughout his
Kingdom. His son Harald was attacked by the Emperour

         Otto I. from whom the sea betwixt Jutland
and Holland has got the Name of Otten sound; because
the Emperour there threw in his Lance to mark the
utmost Limits of his Expedition. suen O•tt•. His son suen Otto
came to the Crown in the year 980. who being taken
Prisoner by the Jutins, was redeemed by the Women,
who gave their Gold and silver Ornaments for his
Ransom: In recompence of which he granted them this
Privilege, that whereas they used only to have a small
Portion in Mony out of their Fathers Inheritance, they
for the future should have an equal share with the Males▪
He also Conquered a part of England, and died in the
year 1012. His son Canut,
         Canut II. 
          or Cnut II. surnamed the Great,
was King of Denma•k, Norway and England, having
Conquered the latter of these three by force of Arms,
tho England did not remain long under the subjection of
the Danes; for after his death, Harald and only Hardiknut
Reigned in England; after whose death the Danes were
again chased out of England. Besides this, Magnus,
son of s. Olaus King of Norway, made himself Master
of Denmark; which Kingdom however, after his
death, sueno II. obtained, but he was forced to fight for
it against Harald Hardrode, then King of Norway. He
died in the year 1074. Him succeeded his sons Harald
VII. (who Reigned but two years) and Canute IV. 
This King did give great Power to the Bishops in
Denmark▪
          and granted the Tenths of all the Revenues
of the Country to the Clergy. At which the Jutes
being exasperated,1087. slew him at Oden sea; but the Clergy
as an acknowledgement of his Favours bestowed
upon them, placed him in the number of saints, and
his memory was afterwards celebrated with full Cups
at their Feasts, by those who called themselves the
Knutgylden, from him. His Brother Olaus IV. succeeded
him, who died in the year 1095. and after him
Reigned his Brother Erick II. who took Jutin, at that
time a great City in Pomerania. He died in the Ille
of Cyprus in his Pilgrimage to Jerusalem. 
        
§. 2. After his death the whole Kingdom was in great
Confusion, especially when three at once fought for the
Crown, viz. sueno III, Canute VI, and Waldemar I. 
These, after they had waged wars together for many
years, did at last agree to divide the Kingdom into
three parts: but Canute having been assassinated by
sueno, and sueno▪
          again having been slain in a Battel
against Wald•mar,
         Waldemar I. 
          he got the whole Kingdom into his
possession He subdued the Rugians and Vandals▪
         
         1157. who
had hitherto proved very mischievous to Denmark; he
also destroyed the City of Julin. 
         1164. 'Tis related that he
laid the first Foundation of the City of Dantzwick: and
under the Reign of this King, Absalom Bishop of Roshild
first began to build the City of Copenhagen. Waldemar
died in the year 1182. Canute VI. 
          Him succeeded his son Canute
VI. who waged great Wars against the Vandals,
and at last forced their Princes to be his Vassals; taking
upon himself the Title of King of the Vandals or
slaves. He took from Adolf Earl of Holstein, among
other places, the City of Hamburgh, which however
twenty seven years after did shake off the Danish Yoke. 
He having also conquered Esthonia and Livonia, the
Christian Faith was established in these Countries by his
means. He died in the Year 1202. After him reigned his Brother Waldemar II. who at
the beginning was a very fortunate and potent Prince,
and had under his subjection, besides Denmark, the
Countries of Esthonia, Livonia, Curland, Prussia, Pomerania,
Rugen, Meck•enburgh, Holstein, stormar, Ditmarsen
and Wagern, as also the Cities of Lubeck and Lauenburgh. 
But he lost a great part of them again by the following
occasion: Henry Earl of swerin having undertaken a
journey to the Holy Land, had committed, during his
absence, his Lady and Country to the care of Waldemar:
but having been informed, after his return, that
the King had lived in Adultery with his Lady; he,
to revenge this Affront, took him Prisoner by stratagem,
and after he had kept him three years in prison dismist
him, making him pay for his ransom the sum of 45000
marks of fine silver. The Countries of Mecklenburgh
and Pomerania, and the Cities of Lubeck and Duntzwick
         
taking hold of this opportunity, revolted from Waldemar;
Adolf Earl of shauenburgh took from him Holstein
and stormar; the Knights of the Cross took Esthonia
and Livonia. And endeavouring to recover these Countries,
he was vanquished in a Battel fought near Bornhove,
         1227. 
by the Earl of shauenburgh. Yet he recovered
Reval and Esthonia; and died in the year 1241. §. Erick V. 
          13. His son Erick V. succeeded him in the Kingdom,
tho he had also given some parts of it to his other
sons; viz. to Abel, sleswick; to Canute, Blecking•n;
and to Christopher, Laland and Falster. These were
each of them for being sovereigns in these Countries;
but Erick pretending that they ought to be his Vassals,
there were great Commotions in Denmark, till Erick
was miserably murthered by his Brother Abel;
         Ab•l. and
Abel after he had reigned two years was slain by the
Friselanders and Ditmarsians. 
         1250. Whom succeeded his
Brother Christopher I. Aganist this King the Archbishop
of Lunden raised abundance of Troubles,1252. and the King
having imprisoned him,Christ•ph. I. 
          he was by the rest of the Bishops
and Clergy excommunicated, and with him the
whole Kingdom. And at last the King was by them
poisoned,1259. as 'tis thought, with the Host. After him reigned his son Erick VI. Erick VI. 
          who was at Variance
with the Bishops, and engaged in Wars against
sweden and Norway; at last he was taken Prisoner in a
Battel by Erick Duke of Holstein,
         1286. and was barbarously
murthered by some of the great Men of the Kingdom. Erick VII. 
         
He left the Crown to his son Erick VII, who immediately,
in the first year of his Reign, had great contests
with the King of Norway, who had given protection to
to the Murtherers of his Father. He also had some other
Differences with some of the neighbouring states,
and died in the year 1319. Him succeeded his Brother
Christopher II,Christoph. II
          who got his son crowned in his Life
time. This King was banished the Kingdom by his
subjects, who, under pretence of being oppressed with
Taxes, elected in his stead Waldemar Duke of sleswick
their King. But they grew also quickly weary of him,
and recalled Christopher, who afterwards in a battel
fought against this Waldemar lost his son Erick Under1332. 
         
the Reign of this King, schonen being sorely oppressed
by the Holsteiners, who were in Possession of it,
surrendred itself to Magnus King of sweden: And John
Duke of Holstein, perceiving that he could not maintain
it by force, sold all his Right and Title to it, for
70000 Marks▪ fine silver. Under the Reign of this
King, Denmark was torn into so many pieces, that very
few places were left to the King. He died in the year
1333. After his death there was an Interregnum in
Denmark during the space of seven years: In the mean
time the Holsteiners had brought the greatest part of
Denmark under their subjection; till the Danes making
an Insurrection against them, endeavoured to chase them
out of Denmark and for this purpose called Waldemar
the son of Christopher II. (who had been Educated at
the Court of the Emperour Lewis the Bavarian) into
the Kingdom. § 4. Wald. III. 
          
         Waldemar III. did somwhat restore the decaied
state of the Kingdom, having partly forced and partly
bought the Holsteiners out of Denmark: He sold Hisponia
and Reval, to the Knights of the Cross, for 28000
Marks, fine silver; which sum he bestowed most upon
a Journey which he undertook into the Holy Land. But
he got schonen again from Magnus sameck the then
King of sweden, by fair promises; and by an agreement
made betwixt him and Albert, King of swedeland, Gotland
was also surrendred to him, and some other places
belonging at that time to sweden. He was frequently
at Wars with the Hanse Towns, and died in the year
1375. After him Reigned his Grandson Olaus VI. Olaus VI. 
          born of
his Daughter Margaret and Hacquin, King of Norway. 
During his Minority the Mother had the supreme Administration
of Affairs. Having after his Fathers death
obtained the Crown of Norway, he laid also claim to the
Kingdom of sweden, because his Father was son of
Magnus sameck, King of sweden; but he died young. In his stead the Danes and Norwegians received for
their Queen Margaret, his Mother; and she having declared
Erick Pomeran, her sisters Daughters son, her
Associate in the Government, entered into a War against

         Albert King of sweden. But the swedes being in general
dissatisfied with their King, deserted him, acknowledging
Margaret for their Queen. Albert fought a Battel
against Margaret, but was defeated and taken Prisoner
with his son; whom Margaret did not release till after
seven years Imprisonment, under condition that he should
either pay 60000 Marks, fine silver, for his Ransom,
or else resign his Pretensions to the Kingdom of sweden;
and he having performed the last, Margaret caused Eric
Pomeran to be Crowned King of sweden. In the year
next following the Estates of all the three Northern
Kingdoms assembled at Calmar,
         1396. where Erick having
been declared their King, an agreement was made among
them, that these three Kingdoms for the future
should be Ruled by one King. Margaret, who had
been an extraordinary good Queen to Denmark, died
in the year 1412. After whose death Erick was sole
King over these three Kingdoms; but he was in continual
broils with the Holsteiners (who were assisted
by the Hanse Towns) concerning the Dutchy of sleswick;
which differences were at last composed. He
surrendred to his Cousins,Eric Pomerar. the Dukes of Pomerania, the
Island of Rugen, which had been a considerable time
under Danish subjection. 1438. In the mean time the swedes
were grown very discontented, because Erick did not
Govern them according to his Coronation Oath, and
oppressed them by his Foreign Officers; which obliged them
to stand up for the Defence of their Liberty. The Danes also,
seeing that he was very careless of the Affairs of the
Kingdom, and did always live in Gotland, did withdraw
themselves from his Obedience, alledging, among other
matters, that because he had been endeavouring to
Establish his Cousin Bogislaus Duke of Pomerania in
his Throne, in his life time, he had thereby violated
their Right of a Free Election:Christopher. And having chosen
in his stead Christopher Duke of Bavaria,
         1439. 
         Erick's sisters
son, he was Deposed, and retired into Pomerania,
where he ended his life. Christopher Reigned till
the year 1448. with whose Reign the Danes were
very well satisfied. 
§. Chris•ian I. 
          5. After his Death the Danes made an offer of that
Crown to Adolf Duke of sleswick and Earl of Holstein;
But he being very antient and infirm refused to accept
of it, and recommended to them Christian Earl of Oldenburgh,
his sisters son, whom both the Danes and
Norwegians declared their King; and in this Family
these two Crowns have remained ever since, by a continual
succession. This King, soon after, began a War
with the swedes (who had made one Charles Cnutson
their King) because they would have driven the deposed
King Erick out of Gotland; but King Christian,
coming to his assistance, made himself Master of that
Island. Besides this, some of the swedish Nobility, who
were dissatisfied with Charles Cnutson, having sided with
Christian, the War began to be carried on very vigorously
betwixt these two Nations. In this War the
Archbishop of Ʋpsal did attack Charles with such success,
that he obliged him to retire into Prussia, and
Christian was crowned King of sweden. 
         1458. But the
swedes being again dissatisfied with Christian, recalled
Charles Cnutson when the War began afresh: and notwithstanding
Charles Cnutson died in the year 1470,1463. and
Christian came with a great Army into swedeland, yet
could he not maintain himself in the Throne, his Forces
having been defeated near stockholm. In the year 1471
the Emperor Frederick III. gave to him in Fief, Ditmarsen,
as also to the Country of Holstein the Title of a
Dukedom. He married his Daughter Margaret to
James III. King of scotland, giving her for a Dowry
the Orkney Islands and Hetland, which had hitherto been
dependent on the Kingdom of Norway. He died in the
year 1481. In whose stead the Danes and Norwegians
chose his son John their King, who divided the Dukedom
of Holstein with his Brother Frederick. This King
John after he had reigned in peace for a con•iderable
time,John. did at last enter into a War against sweden, and
having defeated the Dalekarls, forced steenure the
Governour to surrender himself and the City of stockholm,
and was crowned King of sweden. 
         1497. But in the
year 1501, he was miserably and shamefully beaten by
the Ditmarsians, whom he would have brought under

his subjection, and afterwards steen sture also drove
him out of sweden. He was in continual broils with
him and his successor suant sture, who were assisted by
the Lubeckers, till these Differences were at last composed;
soon after which he died. §. 1513. 6. Him succeeded his son Christian II, who drew
upon him the Hatred of the Danes,
         Christian II. 
          partly because he
entertained a Woman of mean birth in the Netherlands,
whose name was Duivecke, to be his Mistress, and was
strangely led by the Nose by her Mother sigibirta, a
crafty old Woman; partly because he had caused Torber
Oxe, the Governour of the Castle of Copenhagen, to be,
as 'tis thought, unjustly executed. In the mean time
great Differences were arisen in sweden betwixt steen
sture the younger and Gustave Trolle the Archbishop of
Ʋpsal, the first having destroyed the Castle of steka,
which belonged to the latter. King Christian coming to
the Assistance of the Archbishop took him along with
him into Denmark, where they laid the Design against
swedeland. A Decree therefore was obtained from the
Pope, wherein he having condemned the swedes to undergo
great Penalties for the violence offered to Gustave
Trolle. King Christian, to put this Decree in execution,
sent his Forces into sweden, where steen sture being
slain in an Engagement, the whole Kingdom was put
into Confusion by his Death: And King Christian,
coming at last in person, forced Christina, the Widow
of steen sture, to surrender the City of stockholm. At
last a general Amnesty having been published first,Crowned K. of swede•. 
          he
was crowned King of sweden. 
         1520. But when the swedes
thought themselves most secure, he caused some of the
chief Men, under pretence of the former Violences
committed upon Gustavus Trolle, to be executed by
the Hangman, and committed besides great Cruelties. 
In the mean time, Gustavus Erickson, who had been a
Prisoner in Denmark, having made his Escape arrived
in sweden; and with the assistance of the Dalekarls,
whom he had stirred up, entirely drove the Danes out
of sweden, which ever since has maintained its Liberty
against the Danes. By this time the Hatred of the
Danes against Christian was mightily encreased; and

the Jutes having first of all withdrawn themselves from
their Obedience to him,〈…〉 of his own Kingd it put him into such a Consternation,
that he retreated with his Wife and Children
into the Netherlands. The Danes chose in his stead his
Uncle Frederick Duke of Holstein for their King. Christian,
having raised some Land-forces, did endeavour to
regain the Throne, but they were dispersed again. 
Charles V. also, his Brother in law, was so intangled in
the War with France, that he could not send him sufficient
succours. At last he came with a Fleet into Norway,
where he surrendred himself to Dnut Gyldenstern,
who promised him security. But King Frederick, alleging
that he was not obliged to keep that promise,
made him a Prisoner, and sent him to the Castle of sunderburgh. 
But having resigned his Title to the Kingdom,1532. 
he was removed to the Castle of Callenburgh,
         1546. 
where he died. 1559. 
        § 7. Frederick I. 
          
         Frederick I. entred into an Alliance with Gustavus
King of sweden, and the Hanse Towns, against
the deposed King Christian; and forced the Cities of Copenhagen
and Malmoe, which adhered to Christian, to
surrender themselves to him. He also granted great
Privileges to the Nobility, and died in the year 1533,
the year after he had made Christian II. his Prisoner. 
Him succeeded his son Christian III. Christian III
          who met with
great Opposition at first from Christopher Earl of Oldenburgh
and the Lubeckers, who pretended to restore the
imprisoned Christian to the Throne, and had brought several
Provinces over to their side; but he at last surmounted
these Difficulties, with the Assistance of Gustavus
King of sweden, and made himself Master of Copenhagen. 
And because the Bishops had been all along
against him,1556. they were excluded from the general Agreement;
and having been deposed in the same year,
the Protestant Religion was at the same time established
in Denmark and Norway. He reigned very peaceably
after that time, and died in the year 1558. § 8. Fred•rick II
          His son and successor Frederick II. subdued the
Ditmarsians: then he entred into a War against Erick
King of sweden,
         1560. which was carried on with great

losses on both sides for the space of nine years: at last
a Peace was concluded at stetin, by the mediation of
the Emperour,1570. and the Kings of France and Poland. He
Reigned afterwards very peaceably in Denmark, till
the year 1588. when he died. Under the Reign also of his son Christian IV. Christian IV. 
          the
Kingdom was in great Tranquility, till the year 1611. 
when he attacked the swedish King Charles IX. and
took from him Calmar and Elfsburgh. 
         1613. But he made
Peace with Gustavus Adolph, the son of Charles; by
virtue of which he restored these places unto him, in
consideration of a good sum of Money. 1625. He was entangled
in the Civil Wars of Germany; for he having
been made General of the Circle of the Lower saxony,
he thereby came to be engaged in a War against the
Emperour: But this War proved very disadvantageous
to him, he having received a great overthrow near King
Luttern, and being obliged not only to quit Germany,
but the Imperialists also entered Holstein and Jutland
itself: Yet he recovered all again by virtue of a Peace
made at Lubeck,
         1629. except that he lost the advantage of
some Ecclesiastical Possessions in Germany, which he
intended for his sons. When swedeland was afterwards
engaged in the German Wars, he offered his mediation
betwixt them and the Emperour, in hopes thereby to
recover his losses of the Ecclesiastical Possessions, and
to prevent that the swedes might not get a firm footing in
Germany. In the mean while he was very vexatious
to the swedes, endeavouring by all ways and means to
stop the career of their Victories in Germany, and to
spoil their Trade at home; till at last the swedes being
sorely vexed that their ships were continually detained
and confiscated in the sound, did resolve to put an
end to these inconveniencies; and after they had let
the Danes know, that they would no longer suffer
these Injuries, fell with an Army into Holstein and Jutland,
and at last also into schonen. 
         1643. In this War the
Danes were great losers both by sea and Land, but by
the extraordinary Valour of their King they maintained
themselves,1645. till by the mediation of France, a Peace
was concluded at Bromsebroo; by virtue of which the

         swedes got Gothland, Osel, and Jemperland, and Holland
was given them as a Pledge for the space of thirty
years. The Hollanders also taking hold of this opportunity,
did regulate the Toll of the sound, which hitherto
having been raised at pleasure, had been very
troublesome to them. He died in the year 1648. § 9. Fr••erick III
          Him succeeded his son Frederick III. who upon
the perswasions of the Hollanders,
         1657. attacked the swedes,
promising himself great success against them,War with sweden. 
          at that
time when he supposed that their King Charles Gustavus
had quite weakened his strength against the Poles;
but the swedish King came upon a sudden with an
Army into Holstein and Jutland, and among others, took
the Fortress of Fredericksudde by storm; and there happening
an extraordinary hard Frost at the beginning of
the year 1658. he marched over the Ice, first into Funen,
where he surprised the Danish Troops; from thence
taking his way over Largeland, Laland and Falster, into
Zealand. This prodigious success obliged King Frederick
to conclude a Peace with him at Roshild, by
virtue of which, besides some other advantages, he surrendred
to the swedes, Holland, Bleckingen, schonen,
Bornholm, Bahus, and Drontheim in Norway. 
        But King Charles Gustavus being informed, that by
the perswasions of the Emperour, the Elector of Brandenburgh,
and the Hollanders, the Danes had resolved
to renew the War, as soon as the swedes had left the
Country, or should be again engaged in a War with
Germany or Poland, he resolved to be beforehand with
them, and returning into the Isle of Zealand, took
Cronenburgh,
         〈…〉 C•penhagen. and Besieged Copenhagen by sea and Land. 
In the mean while the Dutch sent a Fleet to Relieve
Copenhagen, against whom the swedes fought with great
bravery: But in the year next following, the swedes
did in vain storm Copenhagen,
         1659. and besides this, lost the
Battel in Funen▪ Bornholm revolted, and Druntheim was
retaken. And tho the Danes endeavoured to carry on
the War against the swedes, hoping to have now after
the death of their King Charles Gustavus, met with an
opportunity to revenge themselves for their former losses;

yet acccording to a Project concluded upon by France,
England and Holland,
         A Peace conclu•ed. a Peace was made near Copenhagen,
almost upon the same Conditions with that concluded
formerly at Roshild, except that Bornholm and
Druntheim remained in the possession of the Danes; in
lieu of which some Lands were assigned to the swedes in
schonen. 
        A Peace being thus concluded,Th• King •eclared absolute an t•e Crown heredi•ar•. the King, at the Dyet
held at Copenhagen, was declared an absolute sovereign,
and the Crown Hereditary; whereby the great Privileges
of the Nobility were abolished, and a new Form
of Government introduced, where the whole Management
of Affairs depends absolutely on the King's pleasure. This King died in the year 1670. Christian. V. 
          Him succeeded his
son Christian V. who after he had put his Affairs into
a good Posture, entred into an Alliance with the Emperor,
Holland and their Confederates. And seeing that
the swedes had been worsted in the Country of Brandenburgh,
he hoped to have met with a good opportunity
to break with sweden. 
         1675. He began therefore with the
Duke of Holstein; who, not foreseeing the Design,
came to him at Rensburgh, whom he forced to quit all
his Advatanges which he had obtained by the Peace of
Roshild, and to surrender into his hands the Fortress of
Tonningen, which he caused to be demolished, and afterwards
took Wismar from the swedes. 
        In the year next following he entred schonen, where he
took Helsingburgh,
         H• mak•th War upon swed•n. 
          
         Landscrone and Christianstad, as also the
Isle of Gotland, with little Resistance. But he having detached
some Troops to invest Halmstad, they were surprized
by the King of sweden, who routed them, and such
as were not slain were all made Prisoners. Not long after,
the whole Danish Army was beaten out of the field
in a bloody Battel fought near Lunden. In the year
1677. King Christian besieged Malmoe, but having
miscarried in a storm which he made upon the place,
he was forced to raise the siege; and soon after received
another Overthrow in a Battel fought near Landscrone
betwixt him and Charles King of sweden. In the
Year next following the Danes were obliged to raise
the siege of Bahus, and to surrender Christianstadt,
         
which reduced to Extremity by Famine: but at sea
they had better success;A Peace. yet, by virtue of a Peace made
betwixt them, they restored all such places as they had
taken from the swedes. 
        § 10. The G•nius o•t is N•
           tion. It is evident, out of antient History, That this
Nation has been formerly very warlike: but in our age
the Danes have lost much of their antient Glory, because
the Nobility have been rather for enjoying their
Revenues in Plenty and Quietness, than for undergoing
the fatigues of War, and the Commonalty have followed
their Example. This may also perhaps be alleged
for a reason, that they having seldom been engaged in
any Wars, but with sweden, (except that Christian IV. 
made war in Germany, which however was carried on
chiefly by German souldiers) which could not be of
any long Continuance, the Danes often wanted opportunity
to keep themselves in exercise; especially since
they had the conveniency of making use of the Germans,
whom they listed for money: and the number of Inhabitants
seemed to be but proportionable to the Country,
which is of no great extent. since the King has been
declared soveraign, all means have been employed to
improve the Military force of the Nation; but it seems
that the National Forces, without the help of the Germans,
will not be of any great Consequence, as to
Land-service. Neither is it the King's interest to put
his Nobility upon Martial Exploits, or that they should
grow famous in War, for fear they should make an Effort
to recover their former Privileges. The Norwegians undergo all sorts of hardship with
more Courage and Vigour,The Norwegians. whereunto they are inured
by their Climate and Air. But the Danes, since they
have been Masters of Norway, have always endeavoured
to keep under this Nation, by taking from them all
opportunities of exerting their vigour, and there are
very few left of the antient Nobility in Norway. Yet
the Norwegians are now adays very good seamen, and
the Dutch make good use of them in sea-service: and
a great many of the Inhabitants of North-holland,
where they are addicted to Fishing, were originally of
Norway. 
        
§ 11. Nature of the soil. The country of Denmark is of no great extent, yet
it is generally very Fertile, and fit both for Tillage and
Pasturage; for a great number of Oxen and Horses are
yearly Transported out of Denmark to other places. 
And a considerable quantity of Corn is sent out of
Denmark into Norway and Island. The seas near Denmark
are pretty well stocked with Fish, which however
are rather for the benefit of the Inhabitants, than for exportation. 
There are little or no Manufactories there,
the Inhabitants being not fitted for such works; neither
is there any Commodities fit for Exportation in great
quantities. On the other hand, the Danes are obliged
to Import Wine, salt, good Beer, and Woollen Manufactury
for Cloaths. They have begun to bring spices
themselves out of the East-Indies, where they have
a small Fort upon the Coast of Cormandel. The Toll,
which is paid by Foreigners in the sound in ready money,
is a very good Revenue in Denmark. Which is
the reason why the Danes can scarce forgive the swedes,
that they do not pay this Tributary Toll to Denmark▪
Norway is for the most part a very raw Country, yet it
produces several Commodities fit for exportation, viz. dried
and salted Fish in great quantity, Timber, Board, Masts,
Tar, Pitch, and the like. There are also in Norway, silver,
Copper, and Iron Mines. But it produces not Corn
sufficient in quantity for the maintenance of its Inhabitants,
nor to brew Beer; besides it wants also the same
Commodities which are wanting in Denmark. As for
its situation its very commodious, to Export and Import
Merchandises to and from other sea-Coasts in Europe. 
Island is stocked with Fish, some salted Flesh, and very
good Down Feathers, which the Inhabitants are fain
to exchange for such Commodities as are, besides Fish
and Flesh, requisite for the sustenence and convenience
of Life. The Fenock Islands do for the most part live
on their sheep and Fish. Besides that, Denmark cannot
raise a considerable Army of its Natives,I•s defects. this is also
a great weakness to this Kingdom, that not only Norway
and Denmark are separated by the sea, and cannot
keep correspondency together but by that way; but also
that this Kingdom is divided into so many Islands;

so that if an Enemy once becomes Master at sea, he
must needs prove very troublesom to Denmark. 
        § 12. N•ighbours of Denmark. 
          As to the Neighbours of Denmark, it Borders
on one side upon Germany; for Holstein, which belongs
to the present Royal Ramily, is a Fief of the Empire. 
And tho the Land Forces of Denmark do not come to
any comparison with those of Germany,
         Germany. and Jutland
lies quite open on that side; yet the Islands are very
secure from the Germans, who are not provided with
shipping, except it should happen that the great and
lesser Belt should both be frozen, which happens very
rarely. Neither is there any great probability that these
two states should differ, except the pretensions upon
Hamborough, which the King of Denmark will not easily
let fall, should furnish an occasion for War. And to
speak truly, it is so delicious a morsel, that it may easily
provoke an Appetite. But it will be a very difficult
task for the King of Denmark to attain his aim
by open force, except there should happen a very strange
juncture of Affairs, or that the inward Divisions, or
else by treachery, this City should give an occasion for
its Ruin. In the mean while it is not easily to be supposed,
that the Neighbouring German Princes should
suffer that a City of so great Consequence should fall
into the hands of a Foreign Prince. In fine, it is of
vast Consequence to Denmark, to hold a good understanding
with Germany, since from thence it must draw
the greatest part of its Land-Forces, wherewith to defend
itself against swedeland. 
        With the swedes Denmark had been in continual
Broils for a considerable time;sw••en. and it seems that there
is an old grudge and animosity betwixt these two Nations,
arising chiefly hence, that the Danes have formerly
always endeavoured to make themselves Masters
of sweden, and to reduce this Kingdom into the same
condition as they had done Norway. Besides, that afterwards
they have made it their business, by ruining
their shipping and Trade, to prevent the growing
Greatness of sweden: But sweden has always vigorously
defended itself, and in latter times has gained great
advantages upon Denmark; for the swedes have not

only recovered schonen, and secured West Gothland,
by the Fortress of Bahus; but they have also a way
open into Jutland, out of their Provinces in Germany. 
On the other hand, the Danes have made it their business
hitherto, by making Alliances with the Enemies
of sweden, to get from them these Advantages. But
if we consider, that these two Kingdoms are now divided
by their natural Bounds to preserve which, France,
England and Holland seem to be mutually concerned;
and that as in human probability Denmark cannot conquer
or maintain itself in swedeland; so the other states
of Europe, are not likely to suffer, that sweden should
become Master of Denmark: It seems therefore most
convenient, that these two Kingdoms should maintain a
good understanding, and be a mutual security to one
another against their Enemies. From Holland Denmark may expect real assistance,Holland. 
in case it should be in danger of being Conquered;
since the prosperity of Holland depends partly on the
free Trade of the Baltic; and if one should become
Master both of sweden and Denmark, he would questionless
keep these Passages closer than they are now. 
But the Danes also are sensible enough, that the Hollanders
will not engage themselves any further in their
behalf, than to keep the ballance even, for fear they
should with an increase of Power, attempt hereafter,
to raise the Toll in the sound at pleasure. But as long
as Holland sides with Denmark,
         England. 
         England will not be fond
of the Danish Party, but rather declare for the other side;
for the preservation of Denmark, and the Trade in the
Baltic, is not of so great consequence to England, as it is
to Holland. 
        The Muscovites may prove very serviceable to Denmark
against sweden:
         Th•
           Muscovites. yet cannot the Danes make any
great account upon an Alliance with them; because it
is very difficult to maintain a Correspondency with
them, especially if the Poles should declare for sweden:
Besides that, the Muscovites, as soon as they have obtained
their aim, commonly have but little regard to
Alliances, or the Interest of their Allies. Denmark can
have no great reliance upon Poland,
         Poland. except that Crown
should be engaged in a War against sweden. 
         France. 
         France has

hitherto shewn no great concern for Denmark, because
it has always been in Alliance with its Enemies; yet
France would not willingly see it ruined, because no
state of Europe would desire the two Northern Kingdoms
should be under the subjection of one Prince:
But I cannot see any reason, why an offensive Alliance
with Denmark, should be profitable to France. spain
is more likely to wish well to Denmark, than to assist
it, except it should happen, that swedeland was engaged
in a War against the House of Austria, or any
other Allie of spain. 
        "
"15","CHAP. X. Of POLAND. § 1. THE POLEs,
         Origine of the Kingd. of Poland. 
          who anciently were called
samartians, and afterwards slavonians,
derived their Name from the Nature of
the Country which they possess; which lies most upon
a Plain, for Pole signifies in their language a Plain; tho
some are of opinion that the Word Polacki, is as much
as to say, the Posterity of Lechus. This Nation formerly
did inhabit nearer to the Country of the Tartars;
but after vast Numbers out of Germany entred the Roman
Provinces, their places were supplied by the nations
living behind them. And it seems that Poland being
in the same manner left by its Inhabitants, which were
then Venedi or Wends, they made room for the next
that took their Place. These then, as 'tis said, having
taken possession of this Country about the year 550,
did,Lechus. under the Conduct of Lechus, lay there the Foundation
of a new state. Lechus resided at Gnicsen, being
encouraged thereunto by an Eagles Nest which he
found there, and taking it as a good Omen, put an Eagle
into the Arms of the new Commonwealth, giving to
that City the name of Gnicsen, which in the Polish
Language signifies a Nest. This Nation first setled it
self in that part of the Country, which now goes by the
name of the great and lesser Poland; neither did their
Limits extend any further, tho since that time they are
mightily encreased. § 2. Twelve Vayvods or Governours. The first Governours of this Nation did not assume
to themselves the Title of Kings, but only that of
Dukes; and the first form of Government was very
inconstant: for after the Race of Lechus was extinguished
(tho it is uncertain how many of them, and for

         〈1 page duplicate〉
         
         〈1 page duplicate〉
         
how long a time they Ruled, or what were their Atchievments)
twelve Governours, which in their Language
are called Vayvods, did administer the Government,
who having at first regulated and refined this barbarous
People by good Laws and Constitutions, at last were
divided among themselves. 700. Wherefore the Poles elected
for their Prince one Cracus,
         Cracus. who having restored the
Commonwealth to its former state, built the City of
Cracovia, so called after his own Name, which he made
his place of residence. Lechus II. 
          Whose youngest son Lechus II. 
to obtain the Principality, murthered his elder Brother;
but as soon as the Fact was discovered, he was banished
the Country. After him ruled a Virgin, whose Name
was Venda,
         Venda. the only Daughter left of the Children of
Cracus,
         750. who having vanquished one Ritiger a German
Prince that pretended Mariage to her out of a blind superstition,
drowned herself in the River of Weixel. 
After her death the administration of the Government
returned again to the Governours or Vayvods, which continued
for some time, till the Poles elected again for
their Prince a Goldsmith called Premislus, who is also
called Lescus I. Lescus I. 
          because he had by a stratagem defeated
the Moravians, who had made an Irruption
into Poland. But he leaving no Issue behind him
a Horse Race was instituted, with condition that the
Victor should succeed in the Government. One of the
Competitours had laid Iron Hooks in the Ground, by
which means the others Horses having been •amed he
was the first that came to the Goal, but the Fraud being
discovered he was killed upon the spot. In the mean
while a certain poor Fellow on foot had run the Race and
was the next to the Impostor, whom the Poles declared
their Prince. 776. His name was Lescus II. and as some say,
was slain in the Wars against Charles the Great. Lescus II. 
          Him
succeeded his son Lescus III. 804. who having appeased Charles
the Great,Lescus III. 
          with Presents, made Peace with him, either
as an unequal Allie, or else by acknowledging himself
his Vassal. Popiel I. 
          He left Poland to his son Popiel, whom he
had begot in Wedlock; but to his natural sons he gave
the neighbouring Countries of Pomerania, Mack, Ca••ubia,
with some others. Popiel II. 
          Him succeeded his son Popiel II. 
an ill man, who upon the perswasion of his Lady murthered

his Father's Brothers, 'tis reported that out of
their dead Bodies came forth Mice, which devoured
Popiel with his Wife and Children. § 3. 820. After his Death there was an Interregnum full
of troubles, till the Poles declared Piastus,
         Piastus. a Countryfellow
born at Crusswitz, their Prince, from whom ever
since such of the Natives as obtained the Royal Dignity,
were called Piasti. His Posterity has reigned for a
long time in Poland, from whom also descended the race
of the Dukes of Lignitz and Brieg in silesia, which is
but lately extinguished. 'Tis said that he was 120 Years
old before he died. Zicmovitus. His son Zicmovitus began his Reign
in the Year 895. a Warlike and brave Prince; whom
succeeded his son Lescus IV. Lescus IV. 
          a good and peaceable Prince. 
Much of the same temper was his son Zicmovistus,
         902. who
began to Reign in the Year 921. Zicmovistus. This Prince had but
one son, who being blind was in the seventh Year of
his Age (in which Year, according to the Custom of
those times, his Head was to be shaved, and he to receive
his Name) restored to his sight, which was then
taken for an Omen, that he should be enlightened with
the Christian Faith. Micislaus 〈◊〉
          His Name was Micislaus I. and
began his Reign in the Year 962. He having a great
many Wives and no Children, occasioned in him a desire
to turn Christian, for some Germans representing to him,
that if he left the Heathenish superstitions he would
certainly beget Children; he was perswaded by them
to remove his Heathenish Wives, which he did, and married
Dambrateca, the Daughter of Bogislaus Duke of
Bohemia. Before he married her, he was baptized himself,
and first introduced the Christian Religion into Poland,
         965. 
as also that custom which has obtained since there,
that at the time when the Gospel is read in the Mass,
the Men half draw their Cymetars to signify that
they were ready to fight for the Christian Faith. § 4. 999. Him succeeded his son Boleslaus Chrobry, who
was by the Emperour Otto III. Boleslaus Chrobry, the first King of Poland. 
          dignified with the Title
of King, who also remitted unto him all the Pretensions
which the former Emperours had upon Poland; and
this in consideration for the kind entertainment which

he had received from Boleslaus in his Pilgrimage to the
Grave of Albart Bishop of Gnicsen, which being then very
famous for some Miracles, was visited by the Emperour
to fulfil his Vow which he had made during a precedent
sickness. This first King of Poland behaved himself
very bravely in his Wars against the Red Russians,
the Bohemians, saxons and Prussians. He also instituted
twelve senators as his Assistants in the administration of
the Government. Miccislaus II. 
          But his son Miccislaus lost for the
most part his Father's Conquests, Moravia having among
the rest been taken from him by the Bohemians. He began
his Reign in the Year 1025. and died in the Year
1034. leaving but one son behind him, whose Name
was Casimir,
         Casimir I. 
          who being an Infant, his Mother Rixa administred
the Government for a while. But the Poles
being dissatisfied with her, she fled with her son into
Germany, who in his Journey in France, assumed the Order
and Habit of a Monk. During his absence, there
were great Disturbances in Poland, Maslaus having about
that time made himself Master of Masuria, which for a
long time after, remained independent of the Kingdom
of Poland. At last the Poles prevailed upon Casimir, to
leave his Monastery and accept the Crown. And to
perswade the Pope to absolve him from his Vow, they
promised, that for each Head, except those of the Nobility
and Clergy, they would contribute yearly a Farthing
towards the maintaining of a perpetual burning
Lamp in the Church of st. Peter in Rome, and cause their
Heads to be shaved above their Ears like Monks. After
he came to the Crown he beat Maslaus and the Prussians,
and restored the Kingdom to its former tranquility. His son Boleslaus surnamed the Hardy,
         Boleslaus the Hardy. did at first
wage War against his Neighbours the Prussians, Bohemians
and Russians with great success;1058. but afterwards giving
himself over to all manner of Debauchery, and having
been checked for that reason by stanislaus the Bishop
of Cracau, who also at last excommunicated him, he
cut him to pieces before the Altar. Then he was excommunicated
by the Pope, and perceiving himself to be
hated by every body, left the Kingdom, and at last murthered
himself. 
§ 5. Ʋladislaus 1082. Him succeeded his Brother Ʋladislaus, who
standing in fear of the Pope, would not at first take
upon him the Title of King. He met with great Troubles
both at home and abroad, which however he overcame
at last. Boleslaus III. 
          Him succeeded his son Boleslaus III. a
brave souldier,1103. who obtained a signal Victory over the
Emperour Henry V. in a Battle fought in the Dogsfield
near Breslau. There was never a Prince in Poland more
Famous for Military Atchievements than himself; it being
related of him, that he fought forty five Battles all
with good success, except the last of all, fought against
the Red Russians, which was lost by the Cowardise of
the Vayvod of Cracovia, unto whom the King for a recompence
sent a Hare-skin and spinning-Wheel, which
so troubled him, that he hanged himself: But the King
also was so troubled at this Defeat, that he died of grief,1139. 
leaving four sons behind him. Ʋladislaus II. 
          Among whom Ʋladislaus
II. obtained a great part of the Kingdom with
the Name of a Prince, yet the other Brothers also shared
several great Provinces among themselves, according to
their Father's last Will. This occasioned great Divisions
and Civil Wars betwixt these Brothers; and Ʋladislaus,
who pretended to dispossess the rest, was himself obliged
to quit the Country. Boleslaus IV. 
          After him Boleslaus Crispus his
Brother was made Prince of Poland,
         1146. who was forced
to wage War against the Emperour Conrade III. and
Frederick I. who would have restored Ʋladislaus. At last
a Peace was concluded betwixt them, by Vertue of which,
Poland remained to Boleslaus, but he was obliged to surrender
silesia, which was then dependent on Poland, to
Ʋladislaus, which being afterwards divided into a great
many Dukedoms, at last fell to the Crown of Bohemia. 
This Boleslaus also received a great overthrow from the
Prussians, his Army having by the treachery of a Guide
been mis•ed into the Moors and Boggs. Him succeeded
his Brother Miccislaus senior,Miccislaus III. 
          but he was deposed for
Male-administration. 1174. Him succeeded his Brother Casimir,
         Casimir. 11780. 
who is only famous for that he chastised the
Prussiant. He died in the year 1194. Lescus V. 
          His son Lescus
surnamed the White, was fain to contend with the banished
Miccislaus for the Kingdom with various success,

till Miccislaus died. 1213. Whose son Ʋladislaus also raised
some Disturbances against him for a while, till at last
he was forced to leave him in the quiet possession of
Poland. 
         The first Inroads o• t•e Tartars. Under the Reign of this Lescus the Tartars
made the first In-road into Russia, and have ever since
proved very troublesome and mischievous to Poland. This
Lescus was forced to wage War with sventopolek,
whom he had constituted Governour of Pomerania. He
having made himself Duke of Pomerania did dismember
it from the Kingdom of Poland. Conrade, also the Brother
of Lescus had got the possession of Masovia and Cusavia,
who being not strong enough to defend himself
against the Prussians, who were fallen into his Country,
he called in the Knights of the Cross, who were then
by the saracens driven out of syria. Unto these he surrendred
the Country of Culm, under condition, that such
places as by their help should be conquered in Prussia,
should be divided betwixt them; which afterwards
proved to be the occasion of great Wars betwixt them
and Poland. 
        To Lescus succeeded his son Boleslaus,
         B•lesiaus V. surnamed the
Chast,
         1226. under whose Reign the Tartars committed prodigious
Barbarities in Poland, and from thence made an
In-road into silesia, where in a Battel fought near Lignitz,
they slew so many of the Inhabitants, that they filled
nine great sacks with the Ears which they had cut off. 
His Reign was besides this full of intestine Troubles. 
Him succeeded his Cousin Lescus,
         L•scus VI. 1279. surnamed the Black,
who was very Fortunate in his Wars with the Russians
and Lithuanians: he also quite rooted out the Jazygians,
which then inhabited Podolia, but the Civil Commotions
and frequent Incursions of the Tartars, occasioned
great Disturbances in the Kingdom. He died in
the year 1289. § 6. After the Death of Lescus, there were great Contests
in Poland concerning the Regency;Premislus till at last Premissus,
Lord of Great Poland got the upper hand;1291. who also reassumed
the Title of King, which the Regents of Poland
had not used during the space of 200 years; ever since
that the Pope, after the banishment of Boleslaus the
Hardy, had forbid them to choose a King of Poland. And

the succeeding Princes were not very ambitious of that
Title, because the Country was divided among several
Persons. But Premislus did think himself powerful enough
to make use of it. He was murthered by some
Brandenburgh Emissaries, after he had reigned but seven
Months. Ʋladisl. III. After him was elected Ʋladislaus Locticus, or
Cubitalis, who did not stile himself King, but only Heir
of Poland. But he having been deposed for Maleadministration,
Wenceslaus King of Bohemia was elected
in his stead. 1300. But after his Death, which happened in
the Year 1309. Locticus was restored, who waged
great Wars against the Knights of the Cross, whom he
at last vanquished in a great Battel. Under his Reign the
Dukes of silesia who were Vassals of Poland, submitted
themselves to the Crown of Bohemia. He died in the
Year 1333. Casimir III. Him succeeded his son Casimir the Great,
who having subdued all Russia, united it to the Kingdom
of Poland, so that it should enjoy the same Laws and
Liberties. He also first introduced the Magdeburgh Laws
and Constitutions into Poland, and the Duke of Masuria
did then first submit himself as a Vassal to the Crown of
Poland. He died in the Year 1370. leaving no Issue behind
him; and by his Death the Male-Race of Piastus
lost the Crown of Poland. 
        § 7. After Casimir the Crown of Poland was devolved
to Lewis King of Hungary,
         Lewis. the sister's son of Casimir:
The Poles were not well satisfied with him, because
he favoured the Hungarians too much. He died
in the Year 1382. sigismund King of Hungary would
fain have succeed him in Poland, but the Poles refused
him. some proposed Zicmovitus the Duke of Masuria,
but Hedwig the Daughter of King Lewis, for whom the
Poles would by all means reserve the Crown of Poland,
would not accept of him for her Husband. At last the
Poles Crowned the above-mentioned Hedwig, and married
her to Jagello Duke of Lithuania,
         Jagello, or 
           Ʋla•isl. IV. 
          under Condition
that he and his subjects should turn Christians, and Lithuania
should be united to Poland in one body. How Lithuania was united o Poland. The
first Condition was performed immediately, for he was
baptized, and called Ʋladislaus IV. But the performance
of the second Article was delayed by the Kings of Poland
         
for a considerable time after, under pretence that the Lithunians
were not well satisfied in this Point, but in effect,
because they were unwilling to surrender their right of
succession to the Dukedom of Lithuania; till at last this
Union was perfected under the Reign of King sigismundus
Augustus. This Jagello defeated the Knights of the Cross
in a memorable Battel, where 50000 Men having been
slain, he took from them a great many Cities in Prussia,
but they afterwards recovered themselves. He died in
the Year 1434. Ʋladisl. V. 
          Him succeeded his son Ʋladislaus V. 
who also afterwards was made King of Hungary, where
he was engaged in a War against the Turks. In this War
John Humades first defeated the Turks near the River
Morava, and Ʋladislaus so beat them upon the Frontiers
of Macedonia, that they were forced to make a
Truce for Ten Years. But upon the perswasions of the
Pope, who sent the Cardinal Julian, to absolve the
King from his Oath, this Truce was broken; and not
long after that memorable Battel was fought near Varna,
where the King himself was killed. 1445. This Defeat was
very shameful and prejudicial to the Christians. § 8. Casimir IV. 
          In his stead Casimir was made King of Poland:
A great part of Prussia, which was weary of the Government
of the Knights of the Cross, did surrender it
self under his Protection: This occasioned a heavy War
betwixt them and the Poles, which having been carried
on a great while with dubious success, a Peace was at
last concluded by the mediation of the Pope; by Vertue
of which, the Poles got Pomerellia, Culm, Marienburgh,
stum and Elbing, the rest remaining under the jurisdiction
of the Knights of the Cross, under Condition, that
the Master of that Order should be a Vassal of Poland,
and a Duke and senator of that Kingdom. Much about
the same time, the Duke of Vallachia, did submit himself
as a Vassal to the Crown of Poland. Under the
Reign of this King, the Deputies of the Provinces first
appeared at the Dyets of the Kingdom. Ʋladislaus the
son of this Casimir was made King of Bohemia, and
afterwards also of Hungary, tho' his own Brother John
Albert did contend with him for the latter, but being
soundly beaten, was obliged to desist from his Pretensions. 

         Casimir died in the Year 1492. Him succeeded
his son John Albert,
         John Albert. who received a signal overthrow
in Vallachia from the Turks and rebellious Vallachians. 
The Turks also fell into Poland, but by a sudden great
Frost a great many Thousands of them were starved to
Death. Under the Reign of this King, the Dukedom
of Plotzk•
          in the Country of Masovia was united to Poland. 
He died in the Year 1501. Whom succeeded
his Brother Alexander,
         Alexander. sigismund. but he did not Reign longer
than till the Year 1506. Whom succeeded sigismund
one of the most Famous Princes of his time. This
King was engaged in three several Wars against the Muscovites,
wherein the Poles always were Victorious in the
Field, but the Muscovites who had got smolensko by
Treachery, kept the possession of that place. The War
which he waged with the Knights of the Cross in Prussia,
at last composed under these Conditions; that Albert
Marquess of Brandenburgh, who was then Master of
that Order, should receive the Eastern parts of Prussia
as a hereditary Fief from the King, and should acknowledge
himself hereafter a Vassal of the Crown of Poland. 
Under his Reign also the whole Country of Masovia was
re-united to the Crown of Poland. He also fought very
successfully against the Vallachians, and died in the Year
1548. sigismund is Augustus. leaving for his successour his son sigismundus
Augustus. Under his Reign Livonia submitted it self to
Poland, as being not able to defend it self against the
Muscovites, who already had taken Dorpt, Felin, and several
other places. In this publick Consternation Estlad and
Reval did surrender themselves to Erick King of swedeland▪
         
But the Archbishop of Riga, and the Master of
the Teutonick Order, did seek for Protection of the
King of Poland, which he would not grant them upon
any other terms, than that they should submit themselves
to the Crown of Poland. Whereupon the Master of the
Order having abdicated himself, surrendred the Castle
of Riga and some other places to the Poles. And he in
recompence of his Loss was made Duke of Curland and
semigall. This occasioned a War betwixt the Poles and
Muscovites, wherein these took from the former Plotzk•. 
This King died without Children,1552. and by his Death the
Male Race of the Jagellonick Family was quite extinguished. 
§ 9. After his Death there were great Contentions
in Poland concerning the Election of a new King, and at
last by the majority of Votes,Henry of Val••s Duke of Anjou. 1574. 
         Henry Duke of Anjou,
Brother of Charles IX. King of France, was declared
King of Poland, who arriving there was crowned in the
same Year. But he had scarce been four Monthsin Poland,
when having Notice that his Brother the King of
France was dead, he in the Night time, and in a thick
Fog, for fear the Poles should detain him, relinquished
Poland, and taking his way through Austria and Italy into
France, took Possession of that Kingdom. The Poles
being extreamly vexed at this Affront, were for electing
a new King. A great many were for Maximilian of
Austria,
         steph. Batori. but stephen Batori Prince of Transylvania having
been declared King by the plurality of Votes, quickly
came into Poland, and excluded Maximilian by marrying
Anna the sister of sigismundus Augustus. This
King reduced the City of Dantzick, which had sided
with Maximilian to obedience. Afterwards he fell upon
the Muscovites, taking from them Plotzko and the
neighbouring Countries. At last he made Peace with
the Muscovites, under this Condition, that they should
resign to him the whole Country of Livonia, in lieu of
which he would restore to them such places as, he had
taken from them in Muscovy. This King adorned the
Kingdom with wholesome Constitutions, and established
the Militia of Horse, which souldiers being paid out of
the fourth part of the Royal Revenues, are commonly
called the Quartians; these he disposed upon the Frontiers
to defend the same against the Incursions of the Tartars. 
By this means that Tract of Land which from Bar, Bracklavia
and Kiovia, extends it self betwixt the two Rivers
of the Dniester and the Borysthenes, as far as to the Black
sea, was filled with populous Cities and Towns, which
is now called the Ʋkraine, it having been formerly a desolate
Country. He also put into a good Order and Discipline
the Cosacks,
         Th•
           Cosacks. who served for Foot souldiers, giving
to them Techtimorovia, situated on the River Borysthenes,
which they made afterwards their Magazine, and
the place of Residence of their Governours. Before
this time the Cosacks were only a wild and barbarous

sort of Rabble, who were gathered out of the Polish
Russia, and having settled themselves in the Island of
the River Borysthenes beneath Kiovia, lived upon Robbing
and Plunder. These Cosacks, after they were brought
into good Discipline by this King stephen, have been for
a considerable time serviceable to the Crown of Poland,
not only against the Incursions of the Tartars, but also
by their cruising into the Black sea, have done great
Mischief to the Turks. For they have had Courage
enough to ransack the Cities of Trebisond and sinope, nay,
even the suburbs of Constantinople with other places. 
This brave King, whilst he was making Preparations against
the Turks, died in the Year 1586. § 10. sigism. III. 
          After his Death, sigismund son to John King of
swedeland was made King of Poland, who had this Advantage,
that his Mother Catherine had been sister of
sigismundus Augustus, and so consequently was descended
from the Jagellonick Race. some of the Poles proclaimed
Maximilian their King, but he coming with
some Forces to take Possession of the Kingdom, was
beaten and taken Prisoner, and before he obtained his
Liberty, was obliged to renounce his Title to that Crown. 
After the Death of John King of sweden,
         1592. 
         sigismund
went in the Year next following into swedeland, where
he was Crowned King of sweden. But having afterwards
lost that Crown, it occasioned a War betwixt Poland
and sweden. In the beginning of this War, Charles IX. 
King of sweden took a great many places from the Poles
in Livonia, which were however most of them afterwards
retaken by the Polish General and Chancellour
Zamoiski: Besides this,1605. the King of sweden was vanquished
in a great Battel fought near Kirckholm and Riga,
where he narrowly escaped himself. But some intestine
Divisions being arisen betwixt the King and the Nobility
of Poland, King Charles got an opportunity to recover
himself. In the mean time there was a War kindled betwixt
the Muscovites and Poles by the following occasion:Th• occasion of he War between Poland and M•sc•vy. 
         
There was a certain Person in Poland who pretended
that he was Demetrius the son of John Basilowitz, Grand
Duke of Muscovy, and that he was to have been murthered

by the Order of Boris Gudenow, who hoped
thereby to obtain the succession in the Empire after
the Death of Theodore the eldest son of the said John
Basilowitz, but that another had been killed in his stead. 
This Man having found great Encouragement from George
Mniszeck the Vayvod of sendemir, promised to marry his
Daughter. Wherefore this Vayvod with the Assistance
of some other Polish Lords having gathered an Army
that marched with Demetrius into Muscovy: And the
Grand Duke Boris Gudenow happening to die suddenly
soon after,1605. 
         Demetrius was well received by the Russians;
and having vanquished such as pretended to oppose him,
he came up to the City of Muscovy, where he was proclaimed
Grand Duke: But he quickly made himself odious
to the Muscovites, they suspecting him to be an
Impostor, but did however hide their resentments till
the arrival of the Polish Bride. In the mean while the
Muscovites (under the Conduct of those of suski, who
were by their Mother's side descended from the Family
of the Grand Dukes) had under-hand got together about
20000 Men. 1606. These at the time when the Nuptials were
celebrating with great Pomp, raised a Tumult, attacked
the Castle, and cut to pieces Demetrius and a great many
Poles who were come along with the Bride, tho' some
of the chiefest defended themselves bravely and escaped
their Fury. Then Basilius suski was proclaimed Great Duke in the
publick Market place,Basil. great Duke of Muscovy. 
          who caused there the Body of Demetrius
to be exposed to publick view, but he being extreamly
defaced by his Wounds, his Face could not be
discerned by the multitude. Immediatly after, a rumor
was spread abroad, that Demetrius was escaped, and another
appeared soon after, who pretended to be the
same Demetrius. Whether it was the same or not, is not
yet determined; this is certain that the Poles did acknowledge
him as such, they being very desirous to revenge
the former Affront and the Death of their Friends. 
This Old or New Demetrius did march with a great
Army composed of Poles and Cosacks into Muscovy,
         1086. where
he several times beat suski, whom he obliged to set at
Liberty the captive Bride, and to beg the King of Poland
to recal his subjects. But the Bride having acknowledged

this Demetrius for her Husband, he got a great
part both in Muscovy and Poland that sided with him, and
would quickly have ruined suski, if he had not been
succoured by the King of sweden who sent Pontus de la
Gardie with some Forces to his Assistance. sigismund also took hold of this Opportunity,sigismund makes his a 〈…〉 of these Troubles in Muscovy. 1609. to try
whether he could at least recover smolensko and severia
from the Muscovites. Wherefore he besieged smolensko
in the Year 1609. which however he could not make
himself Master of till the Year 1611. when he took it
by storm. In the mean time, the Poles which had hitherto
sided with Demetrius, were recalled by sigismund,
who did think it not convenient that so considerable a
part of his Forces should be under the Command of another. 
By the removal of these Forces, suski had leisure
given him to recollect himself, and with the Auxilaries
sent him out of swedeland, he marched against the
Poles who had besieged smolensko,
         1610. but was defeated by
the Poles near Clusin. By this overthrow the Affairs of
the Muscovites were again put into a very dangerous
Condition. Wherefore they took this Resolution to avoid
the Danger which threatened them from the Polish
side. They deposed suski, who by his Misfortunes was
become odious to them, and offered the Crown of Muscovy
to Ʋladislaus the Prince of Poland. 
         The Policy o• the Musc•vites. 
          By this means
they hoped at one stroak to ruin Demetrius, and to be
reconciled to the Poles, in hopes, that they might easily
meet with an Opportunity hereafter, when they had once
rid themselves of the present Danger, to rid themselves
also of the Prince of Poland. And this Project succeeed
very well, for the Polish Troops immediatly left the
Party of Demetrius; suski was surrendred to the Poles,
who promised to the Muscovites, what had sworn before
Allegiance to Ʋladislaus, that he should appear in Person
in Muscovy in the Year 1610. But King sigismund by
the perswasions of some of his Friends refused this offer,
thinking it more for his purpose to Conquer Muscovy by
Force of Arms; which Opportunity, however, he missed
of, since he did not immediatly march towards the City
of Muscovy,
         The Oversight of sigismund. 
          which he might have taken at the first Assault. 
But the Muscovites having discovered the Design
of the Poles, did unanimously revolt from Ʋladislaus,
         
especially since they had in the mean while been rid of
Demetrius, who had been murthered by the Tartars that
were his Gaurds. They therefore attacked the Polish
Garrison in the City of Muscovy, which consisted of seven
Thousand Men, but these defended themselves bravely;
and besides this, set Fire to the whole City, which before
had 180000 Houses, where abundance of People were
burned. Nevertheless the Muscovites recovered themselves
and besieged the Polish Garrison in the Castle of
Muscovy. If King sigismund immediatly after the taking
of smolensko, had sent them Relief, as he easily might
have done, he questionless might have established his Affairs
in Muscovy. But he marching back with his Army
into Poland, and sending to their Relief neither Men
nor Money, the Garrison who had before plundered the
Treasury of the Great Duke, to the number of 7000. 
leaving some to Guard the Castle, fought their way
through the Muscovites, and came to King sigismund to
demand their Pay. And tho' sigismund began to apply
himself in good earnest to re-establish his Affairs in Muscovy,
yet all his Designs were by the jealousie which
reigned betwixt the Generals so long delayed, till the
Poles who had the Gaurd of the Castle of the City of
Muscovy, were forced by Famine to surrender it. Thus
all was lost in Muscovy; for sigismund, who was the more
troubled at it, because he had made an account by the
Conquest of Muscovy, to open his way into swedeland. 
        Besides this,The Poles defeated in Moldavia. 
          the Poles sustained in the same Year a considerable
Loss in Moldavia. Prince Ʋladislaus did undertake
an Expedition into Muscovy, but to no great purpose,
wherefore he made a Truce with them for fourteen
Years,1617. wherein it was agreed, that the Poles in the
mean time should keep in their Possession the Dukedom
of severia, Zernigo and Novogrod, which they had taken
during these Troubles in Muscovy. In the mean time
George Farenbach did surrender several places in Livonia
to the King of sweden, Gustavus Adolphus, but it was suspected
that he intended to betray the King; for soon
after, the same Farenbach was reconciled to King
sigismund, unto whom he restored all the places, except
Pernau. 
        
In the Year 1620. A War betwixt the Poles and Turks. 
          the Poles were engaged in a War
against the Turks, that were as 'tis supposed, stirred up
by Betlem Gabor Prince of Transylvania; for sigismund
having assisted the Emperour against him, Betlem Gabor
was for making them a Diversion by the help of the
Turks. The Turks therefore entred Moldavia with an
Intention to banish that Duke, who sided with the Poles. 
the Polish General Zolkieuski coming to the Assistance
of the Duke of Moldavia advanced too far into the Country,
and as he was marching back, was totally routed
and himself slain upon the Place. In the Year next following
the Turks marched with their whole Froces against
Poland, who were met by the Poles near Chocim
under the Command of Prince Ʋladislaus. The Polish
Army was about 65000 strong, but the Turks 392000
Men, commanded by the Turkish Emperour Osman in
Person. The Turks did attempt three times to take the
Polish Camp by storm, but were as often repulsed with
great Loss. But the Poles in the mean while suffered extreamly
for want of Ammunition and Provisions, and
were mightily weakened by sicknesses and the Mortahty
among their Horses. Nevertheless the Turkish Emperour
made a very honourable Peace with them, after
he had lost 60000 Men, in these several storms made
upon their Camp, and a greater Number in his march
back to Constantinople. 
        In the mean time King Gustavus Adolphus falling into
Livonia,
         1621. took the City of Riga without any great Resistance. The Invasiof Gustavus Adolp• us. 
And the rest of Livonia, except Dunneburgh was
Conquered by the swedes in the Year 1625. 1625. King Gustavous entred Prussia with an Army in the Year 1626. 
where he took the Cities of Marienburgh and Elbing,
besides some other Places. This War was thus carried
on without any General Engagement till the Year 1629. 
when Hans Wrangel the swedish General defeated the
Poles near Gorzno. Then the Emperour sent some Forces
to the Assistance of the Poles, who in a Battel fought
near stum, were very near having made King Gustavus
their Prisoner. But the Polish Affairs being after
this Battel fallen into great Confusion, a Truce was concluded
by the mediation of France and England till the
Year 1634. the swedes being in the mean while to keep

in their Possession Elbing, Memel, Braunsberg, Pill•u,
and what else they had taken in Livonia. sigismund
died in the Year 1632. § 11. Ʋladis. IV. 
          After his Death his son Ʋladislaus IV. was
declared King, who in the Year next following, obtained
a signal Victory over the Muscovites that had besieged
smolensko; for he not only forced them to raise the
siege, but also brought the Muscovite Army into such
streights, that they were forced to surrender themselves. 
And the Turks who would have made a Diversion to
him,1634. were also bravely repulsed. At last Ʋladislaus
made a very advantageous Peace on his side with the
Muscovites, by vertue of which these renounced all their
Pretensions upon the two large Dukedoms of smolensko
and Ozernichow. This begot such a Terrour among the
Turks, that they freely made him Restitution for the
Damages sustained in their last In-road, having also
caused the Bashaw who commanded these Forces,1635. to be
strangled. The Truce with sweden was prolonged at
stumdorf in Prussia, for 26 Years, where the places possessed
before by the swedes in Prussia were restored to
the Poles, because the swedish Affairs in Germany were
then after the Battel of Norlingen in a very ill Condition,
and besides this, the English and Dutch were extreamly
dissatisfied with the Tolls that were paid in Prussia. 
        In the Year 1637. The Cause of the War with the Cosacks. 
          the Foundation was laid of the
War with the Cosacks, which has brought unspeakable
Mischiefs upon the Poles. The business happened thus:
As the number of the Cosacks was greatly encreased by
the great number of Boors, which frequently ran into
them, so the great Men in Poland had purchased great
Estates in the Ʋkraine, who were of Opinion, that their
Revenues would be considerably encreased, if the Liberty
of the Cosacks were reduced into more narrow bounds. 
Wherefore they having advised the King, that they
ought to be more restrained for the future; the Polish
General Konicepoliski, did cause the Fortress of Hudack
to be built, just at a point where the River of Zwamer
falls into the Dnieper or Borysthenes. The Cosacks endeavoured
to prevent the perfecting of this Work by force,
but being routed by the Poles, were obliged to surrender

their General Pauluck and some of their Chief Men among
them, who were all, notwithstanding a Pardon
was promised them before hand, beheaded. Besides
this, it was decreed in the Dyet, that all their former
Priviledges and the Fortress of Techtimorovia should be
taken from them, and that in their stead, a new body
of Militia should be settled there. To put this Decree
in execution, the Polish Army marched into the Ʋkraine,
against which, the Cosacks fought with great bravery,
promising nevertheless, that they would be faithful to
the Crown of Polana, if their ancient Priviledges were
confirmed to them, which the Poles did promise them,
bur did not perform; nay, did even treat some of them
very ill. For among other oppressive Methods, they took
also from them some of their Greek Churches. Their
General Chmielinski was also grosly Affronted, for which
he could obtain no satisfaction. For the King having
granted him a Priviledge to build some Mills, a certain
Gentleman whose Name was Jarinski, burnt the same,
having also ravished his Wife, and afterwards killed both
her and her son. § 12. John Casimir. In the mean time Ʋladislaus died, whom succeeded
his Brother John Casimir. 
         1647. Then Chmielinski to
revenge himself, stirred up the Cosacks against the Poles,
who with Burning, Plundering and Ravishing, did what
Mischief they could to the Polish Nobility. And the senators
having desired the King to march out into the
Field against them, they were answered by him, That
they ought not to have burnt down their Mills. Whereat
the Poles being extreamly dissatisfied brought together
an Army of 50000 Men, which being defeated by the
Cosacks,
         The Poles defeated by •he Cos•••s. 
          there were killed 10000 upon the spot, and besides
this, they took the City of Kiovia. To revenge
this Affront, the Poles summoned the seventh Man
throughout the whole Kingdom, and marched against the
Cosacks without the Consent of the King, but were again
miserably beaten by them. But Chmielinski celebrating
the Nuptials of his son with the Daughter of the Prince
of Vallachia, the Poles surprised the Cosacks thereabouts,
plundered the City, and took the Grecian Patriarch prisoner. 
The Cosacks then sent to the King to know whether

this had been done by his Authority; and the King
having answered▪ No, but that it had been done by the
Nobility to take revenge of the Cosacks; these joined
with the Tartars and fell into Poland; against these the
King went in Person into the Field at the Head of the
Nobility, and defeated them in a Battel▪ but the King
having afterwards made an Agreement with them, the
Nobility was greatly discontented with the King's proceedings,
alledging, that the King had granted too much
to the Cosacks. 
        Whilst the Jealousies reigned in Poland,
         The Muscovites join w•th the C•sacks. 
          the Muscovites
fell into Poland, and having brought the Cosacks over to
their Party, besieged smolensko, which they took in the
Year next following; and having ravaged every where
in Lithuania,
         1653. they took Wilea and some other Cities, where
they committed great Barbarities. In the Year 1655. The King of sweden invades Poland. 
          another storm threatened the Poles. 
For Charles Gustavus King of swedeland having with an
Army of chosen Men entred that Kingdom, first Conquered
great Poland and Masovia, and afterwards the
lesser Poland, with the capital City Cracovia, from whence
he marched into Prussia, where almost all the Cities surrendred
themselves, except Dantzick, where were at first
a great many Citizens that favoured the swedes, but by
the perswasions of some Ministers, were kept in Obedience
to Poland. The Resistance which was made by
this one City, was the main Reason why all the Advantages
got by the swedes proved fruitless at last, and
that they could not maintain themselves in Prussia, notwithstanding
that not only the whole Militia of Poland,
and that part of Lithuania which was not under the subjection
of the Muscovites, had submitted themselves to the
swedish Protection, but also, that King John Casimir himself
fled into silesia. For the Poles having recollected themselves
after the first Constemation was over, and being
joined by the Tartars, fell upon such of the swedish Forces
as were dispersed up and down the Country. The
Lithuanians also revolted, and killed all the swedes that
were in Winter Quarters with them. King Charles
Gustavus also had greatly weakened his Army, not only
by the great March towards Jeroslavia, but also Czarneski,
the Polish General did often with his Light-Horse fall upon

on the Rear of the Army, and did considerable Mischief. 
In the mean while the Poles also had retaken
Warsovia, where they had made the swedish Governour
Wittenbergh and some other great Officers Prisoners,
contrary to the Articles made at the surrendry
of the Place. And tho' King Charles Gustavus having
been joined before by the Elector of Brandenburgh's
Forces did vanquish the Poles and Tartars in a memorable
Battel which lasted three Days, and was fought near
Warsovia,
         The Battel of Warsaw. 
          yet all the Princes of Europe began to look
about them, and to consult about a Diversion to be made
sweden. The Muscovites fell into Livonia, where they
besieged Riga, but to no purpose. The Hollanders did
give plainly to understand, that they were not willing
that Prussia should come under the subjection of swedeland. 
And the Danes also began to be in motion. On
the other hand,Ragozi Prince of Transylvania invades Poland. 
         Ragozi Prince of Transylvania entred Poland
with an Army, to try whether perhaps he could
obtain that Crown for himself. But the King of sweden
being obliged to march out of Poland against the
Danes, Ragozi made a bad Market of it; for before he
could reach his own Country, he was totally routed,
and oliged to make a shameful accord with the Poles. 
Which misfortune however he might have avoided, if
he, according to the advice of the King of sweden, who
promised to keep the Poles so long in play, till he was
out of danger, would have taken his march directly
over Brescie, Pinsk, and so further towards his own
Frontiers. But Ragozi would by all means take his way
near Cracaw. Then the Poles retook Cracaw and Thorn,
and chased the swedes out of Curland, who had before
taken the Duke of that name Prisoner. The Poles also
besieged Riga, but were beaten from thence by the
swedish General Helmfeld. 
         1606. And tho the Poles by the
Peace made at Oliva recovered all Prussia again, yet
were they obliged to renounce all their pretensions upon
Livonia, and to leave the Muscovites in the possession of
smolensko, severia and Kiovia. Neither could they
appease the Cosacks, some of them having put themselves
under the protection of the Muscovites, some under
the Turks, whereby they shewed the way to the
Turks into Poland. Neither could the King put an end

to the intestine divisions and jealousies, wherefore at last
tired with these troubles John Casimir resigned the
Crown, and living a retired life in France in the Abby
of st. Germain, he there dyed a few years after. §. 13. There being now left none of the Royal Family
in Poland, several Foreigners pretended to the
Crown. But at last a Piastus, whose name was
Michael Witsnowizki,
         Michael Witsnowizki was declared King, chiefly by
the Votes of the lesser Nobility. His short Reign
was full of intestine commotions,1670. and the Turks in the
mean while did not cease to do considerable mischief in
Poland; having in the year 1672. taken Caminieck in
Podolia, which Fortress having been formerly thought
impregnable, serves them now for a door, through
which they may enter Poland at pleasure. A Peace
was then concluded with the Turks, by vertue of which
the said Fortress remained in the possession of the Turks,
the Poles also having promised to pay to the Turks a
yearly Tribute. This King dyed in the year 1673. In
whose stead in the year next following the Polish General
John sobieski was made King of Poland,
         John sobieski. he having
in the year before attacked the Turks in their Camp
with such success, that of 32000 Men scarce 1500
escaped alive. He renewed the War with the Turks,
but concluded a Peace with them in the year 1676. by
vertue of which the Turks kept the Fortress of Caminieck,
but remitted the yearly Tribute to the Poles. He
being a Man of great capacity, it is hoped that he may
prove a good King of Poland. 
        §. 14. It is to be considered concerning the Polish Nation,T•e Genius of this Nation. 
that whosoever is not a Nobleman in Poland, is
esteemed a Boor. For the Inhabitants of the Cities are very
little regarded, and the Tradesmen are most Foreigners. 
But the Boors are esteemed nor used no better than
slaves, being also very raw and barbarous, both in their
Life and Conversation, wherefore when we talk of the
Poles, thereby ought only to be understood the Nobility. 
They are therefore commonly downright and honest,
very seldom given to the art of dissembling; they are of
a very generous spirit, and expect a great deal of respect. 

And if you give them as much respect as they
pretend to, they are no less courteous, and will willingly
pay a respect again to you; and their words and behaviour
are full of Pomp and Ceremony. They are
very liberal, or rather profuse; and not given to be parsimonious,
tho they should want the next day. This
Nation also is very fierce and extravagant, much inclined
to an uncountroled liberty, or rather licentiousness
and petulancy. Wherefore Plots and Conspiracies
against their Kings are frequent among them, whose
Actions they canvase with a great deal of freedom, being
always jealous of the least point of their Liberty. 
They do not want courage, but they are more fit to
act with a sudden heat, than to endure long the fatigues
of War. And because the Nobles only apply themselves
to the War, who never serve but on Horseback,
and the rest of the Inhabitants are of no great spirit,
their infantry gathered out of the Natives is not worth
much, wherefore they are obliged in their stead to make
use of Foreigners listed into their service, or of the
Cosacks, who are courageous and active. §. 15. This Country is of a vast extent,The Nature of the soil, &c. Its Commodities. and very
Fertile in general, fit both for Tillage and Pasture, or
breeding of Cattel. For Holland draws most of its
Corn out of Poland, and the Polish Oxen are sent in
great numbers into Germany. The Polish Wool also is
in good esteem abroad. Poland abounds with good
Horses. Lituania produces abundance of Hony, which
is most consumed by the Inhabitants, who make Mead
of it; the rest is exported, as likewise abundance of
Wax, Hemp, Flax, Leather, Pot-aslies, salt, Wood,
and the like. But on the contrary the Commodities
which are imported here are silk, woollen stuffs and
Cloaths, Tapestries, sables, Hungarian and spanish
Wines, abundance of spice, which they use in great
quantity in their Dyet. If the Poles were addicted in
the least to good Husbandry, and would apply themselves
a little to Manufactures, the Commodities fit for
exportation here, would much surpass those which need
be imported. Poland is very populous and full of Towns and Villages. 
some have computed that the King and the Nobility
have in their possession 90000 Cities and Villages,
the Bishops and Canons 100550, the rest of the Clergy,
Monks and Nuns, 60950. Which in all amounts
to the number of 250950 Towns and Villages. Yet I
will not be answerable for this account. §. 16. The strength of the Kingdom. The chief strength of this Kingdom consists
in the Nobility. The Poles have formerly given
out that they could raise 250000 Horse, some say
200000, out of the Nobility. Which seems to be
a little largely spoken, except you would reckon among
them their servants. This is certain that in no Kingdom
of Europe there is so great a number of Nobles. 
They also may find a way to raise a proportionable Infantry
out of the Cosacks. And if they will stretch a
little their Purses, they are able enough to raise sufficient
for the maintaining of a great Army. Their weakness. But here is
the mischief, that the King cannot levy any extraordinary
Taxes, without the consent of the Nobility, and
both the Clergy and the Nobility are very backward
in paying of any Taxes, or at least grow quickly aweary
of them, except it be in case of the highest necessity. 
And this is the reason why the King of Poland cannot
carry on a War long with vigour. Besides this when
the Nobles are s••moned to appear in Arms, they come
slowly into th• 
         •ield, and are not easily kept under
Discipline. The Polish Armies have also this inconveniency
in them, that where 10000 fighting Men are,
at least five times the number of servants and idle Fellows
follow the Camp, which proves a destruction to
their own Country, and occasions scarcity of Provisions
both for Men and Horse. §. 17. Concerning their Form of Government;Their form of Government. it
is to be observed that the Poles live under one Head,
who bears the Title, and lives in the splendour becoming
a King; but if you consider his Power, which
is circumscribed within very narrow bounds, he is in
effect no more than the Prime or Chief Regent in a
Free Commonwealth. This King is always chosen by

a free Election, where every Noble Man there present
has his Vote; and tho the Poles have been always inclined
to keep to the Royal Race, yet have they never
been for declaring a successour during the life of the
present King, but have always expected the vacancy of
the Throne, as being of opinion, that this time is the
most proper to abolish such Abuses as perhaps are crept
in under the former Reign, and to prevent all means
which may prove prejudicial afterwards to their Liberties. 
But, that, during this Vacancy, all disorders
may be prevented, Justice is then exercised with more
severity than at other times: the Archbishop of Guiesen,
who is the Primate of Poland, being in the mean while
the Regent, or as it were Interrex of the Kingdom. 
The Poles have had for a considerable time this Maxim,
that they would rather choose a King out of a Foreign
Princely Family, than out of their own Nobility; as
being of Opinion that thereby the equality among the
Nobility may be better preserved; for a Foreigner is no
more engaged to one than to another; whereas a Native
always prefers his Kindred and Relations before the
rest: and this Rule they have observed ever since the
time of Jagello, who being a Lituanian, united Lituania
with Poland. But they had not the same good fortune
with sigismund King of sweden, partly because
the situation of these two Kingdoms is such: that both
cannot well be governed by one King; partly because
they were thereby engaged in a heavy War against
swedeland, which else might easily have been avoided;
but they have been always very careful not to take their
Kings out of the House of Austria, fearing lest they
should be treated like the Hungarians and Bohemians. 
In the two last Elections they have chosen two Kings
out of their own Nobility, and whether thereby these
Factions which have hitherto been predominant in that
Kingdom, can be suppressed, time will shew. This
Elective King has a great Revenue out of the Lands
belonging to the Crown,The Revenues of the King. and has the sole power to
dispose of all vacant Offices, Dignities and Benefices;
but he cannot make new Laws, begin a War▪ impose
new Taxes, or undertake any other Matters of great
moment, without the consent of the Estates. The Estates

in Poland are composed of the Bishops and some
Abbots,The Estates of the Kingdom. of the Palatins or Vaywods, which are Governours
of the Provinces, of the Castellans or Governours
of Castles, and of the chief Officers of the
Kingdom; these compose the senate, which consisted
formerly of 150 Persons; besides these there are the Deputies
of the Nobility out of each District, who have
almost the same power which the Tribunes of the People
had at Rome; since one single person among them by
entring his Protest may annul a Decree at the Dyet;
and these Deputies use their Tongues very freely at the
Dyet, both against the King and his Ministers; from
whence it often happens that Matters are debated here
with great confusion, since by the capricious humour
of one Deputy the benefit of the whole Dyet is lost
at once; especially since a certain time of six weeks is
prefixed by the Laws for the holding of the Dyet,
which they rarely suffer to be Prorogued, and that not
but for a very few days; but they call this right of contradicting,
the soul of the Polish Liberty. The King
is also obliged to bestow all the vacant Benefices upon
the Nobility, and cannot reserve any for his own use,
or bestow them upon his Children without consent
of the Estates,Of the Administration of Justice. neither can he buy or take possession of
any Noblemens Lands. The King also is not Master of
the Judicial Courts; but there is a certain High Court
of Justice, the Judges whereof are Nobles: first Instituted
by King stephen Batori. These Judges are
changed every twelve months, and keep their session
six months in the year at Petricovia, and six months again
at Lublin, and from these no Appeal lies to the
King; except that some Cases of the greatest Consequence
are determined at the Dyet; but Cases belonging
to the King's Exchequer, or to his Revenues, are determined
by the King. The Poles are extreamly fond
of this form of Government, as being very suitable to
their natural fierce inclinations; yet the same is very
improper for any sudden and great undertaking; and
contributes not a little to the weakness of this vast
Kingdom, especially when the Nobility is refractory,
and jealous of the King. 
§. 18. Neighbours of Poland. 
          The Neighbours of Poland are on one side
the Germans, where there is an open Country upon the
Frontiers; and particularly Poland borders upon silesia,
and in one corner upon Hungary. 'Tis true that the
German Empire is much superiour in strenth to Poland,
         Germany. 
but the interest of both these Kingdoms is such, as not
to have any great occasion to differ with one another,
except Poland should perhaps join with such Estates in
Germany as would upon an occasion oppose the setting
up of an Absolute soveraignty in the Empire; and in
such a case the Poles would not want assistance either
from the German,
         The House of Austria in particular. or foreign Princes, that must concur
in the same Interest. The House of Austria alone is
not powerful enough to conquer Poland, or to maintain
a Country which is of so vast an extent and very
populous, and lying all upon a level is not secured by
any fortified places. If no body else should side with
Poland, the Turks themselves would not easily suffer that
the House of Austria should acquire such an advantage,
and the Turks are the fittest instruments to prevent it. 
But the House of Austria has often endeavoured, tho
the wisest among the Poles have always opposed it, to
unite the Kingdom of Poland to their Family by an
Election; but the Poles are conscious of the danger
which might accrue from this Union to their Liberty;
and besides this they are no great admirers of the Germans,
whose modesty and good Husbandry they commonly
despise. The Interest of Poland and Germany, with reference to the Turk. 
          But it is of great consequence to Poland,
that the Turks may not become quite Masters of the
Ʋpper Hungary, and much more that they do not get
footing in Moravia; since thereby they would open
their way into the very Heart of Poland. And on the
other hand it is the common Interest both of the House
Austria, and of all Germany, that the Turks may not
become Masters of Poland, since thereby they would
open their way into Germany. For the old saying of
Philip Melanchton, si Turca in Germaniam veniet, veniet
per Poloniam, if the Turks come into Germany
         ▪ they
will certainly come by the way of Poland, did not
arise from a Prophetick spirit, but has its good Reason
in Geography. And it seems to be the common Interest

of Poland, and the House of Austria, to keep up
a mutual good understanding, since they both cover
one anothers Frontiers, and Poland draws a great advantage
from its Oxen and salt which are sent into
Germany. And if Poland should engage it self in good
earnest against the House of Austria, it ought to be
jealous of the Moscovites, who may attack it behind,
except Moscovy were otherwise employed before. Poland
also may be troublesome to the House of Austria,
when that House is engaged in Wars against France,
sweden, or the Turks. Wherefore for a considerable
time the House of Austria has endeavoured by Marriages
to Allie Poland with their Family, and to gain
a considerable party in the senat. And France has followed
the same methods to draw Poland from the Interest
of the House of Austria; and the Poles having
been caressed by both parties have got no small advantage
by this Rivalship. Brandenburgh. 
         Brandenburgh also borders
on one side upon Poland, and tho he alone cannot hurt it
much, yet experience has taught us that in conjunction
with others he has been able to create great troubles to
the Poles. Tho on the other hand it is to be feared,
that perhaps upon a good occasion offered to the Poles
they may attempt to unite all Prussia to their Kingdom,
as the Elector of Brandenburgh knew how to
time it, when he obtained the soveraignty over it. 
As long as the differences betwixt Poland and sweden
were on foot,Denmark and sweden. 
         Denmark by making a diversion could be
very serviceable to Poland; but since the causes of these
differences are taken away, Poland need not make any
particular reflection upon Denmark swedeland and
Poland have all the reason in the world to cultivate a
mutual good understanding, since they may be very
serviceable to one another against the Moscovites. Poland
borders upon Moscovy by a great tract of Land,Moscovy. where
the Frontiers are common to both: These two Kingdoms
seem to be very near equal in strength▪ and tho
the Poles are better soldiers than the Moscovites, yet
has the Great Duke of Moscovy this advantage over
them, that he is absolute in his Dominions. And it is
of great consequence to either of them, which of these
two is in the possession of smolensko, to recover• which

the Poles ought to employ all their strength. For the rest,
these two states being both obliged to have a watchful
Eye over the Turks, can assist one another against them
in case of necessity. The Tartars are the most pernicious Neighbours of
Poland,
         The Tartars▪
          for they are a Nation living by depredations,
who surprise their Neighbours, and when they have
loaded themselves with spoils return Home again, where
you cannot be revenged of them, they being so nimble,
and having nothing worth taking from them. Wherefore
what ever mischief they do must be taken as if
you were bit by a Dog, except you can catch them in
the fact, and make them pay for it with their Heads. 
Against these the Country of Moldavia used to be a
Bulwark to Poland. 
         Moldavia. For through that Country the Tartars
have a direct passage into the Provinces of Poland,
which may be shut up against them by the help of that
Prince. Wherefore the Poles do much lament the loss
of this Dukedom, which having been formerly a Fief
of that Crown, tho that Duke pays also some Tribute
to the Turks, was brought in the year 1612. entirely
under the Turkish subjection. The Cosack•. The Cosacks also used to
be very serviceable against the Tartars, as living near
the Isthmus of the Taurick Chersonese, and therefore
were conveniently situated to cut of their retreat in
their return Home. But the Poles by their ill entertainment
have so exasperated the Cosacks, that since they
have done as much mischief to them, as formerly they
used to do good. And if the Poles should not be able by
fair means to bring over the Cosacks again to their side,
and these should either submit themselves to the Moscovites
or the Turks, or that these should quite root them
out, then Poland has got an incurable Ulcer on that
side, which may prove fatal to all the Neighbouring
Provinces of the Ʋkrain. 
        Lastly, the Turk is a dangerous Neighbour to Poland,
whose strength is much superior to that of Poland,
especially if the Poles are not assisted by the Cosacks,
or by some Foreign state. For, tho the Polish Cavalry
may not be inferiour to the Turks, yet cannot I see
which way they can bring into the Field such Forces as
may be equal to the Janisaries. Tho the negligence and

domestick divisions of the Poles have lately been the
chief inducements, which have drawn the Turks so deep
into Poland. There is not any thing which would
more conveniently secure the Poles against the Turks,
than if the Princes of Moldavia, Wallachia and Transylvania,
did belong to Poland, they being able to hinder
the passage of the Turks into Poland. But, because
the Poles have long ago lost this advantage, or rather
neglected it, it is their business now, to take care that
the Turks do not advance deeper into the Country. 
And to take away all pretensions of a War from the
Turks, it seems very necessary that the Poles, as much as
in them lies, do take care that the Cosacks do not in
time of Peace commit depredations upon the Turkish
subjects. For else the Turks are not to be blamed, if
endeavouring to root out these rapacious Birds they destroy
their Nest, and make the Ʋkrain a vast Wilderness. 
When Poland is engaged in a War with the Turks,
it may expect some subsides from the Pope. The House
of Austria, is able, by making a diversion to the Turks,
to give relief to Poland; but this House hitherto has
not been forward to attack the Turks, if these have not
been the first aggressors. The Moscovites also might
contribute somthing this way, if there were any hopes
of a true understanding betwixt these two Nations; but
as the case now stands, the Poles must chiefly rely upon
their own strength, and by the circumstances of their
own affairs be able to judg how far they ought to engage
themselves against the Turk. 
        "
"16","CHAP. XI. Of MOsCOVT. §. 1. THE first origin of this Empire,The antient state of Russia. 
          and the
atchievements of their antient Princes
are very uncertain and obscure, since
what is to be found of this nature among
an ignorant people, is all very confused: so much
is certain, that this great Empire was formerly divided
into a great many petty Lordships, which afterwards
were united in one body. We will only relate in a few
words, that the Russians in the year 989. first embraced
the Christian Religion, at which time their Prince, Wolodomir
married Anne, the sister of the Grecian Emperour
Basilius Porphyrogenitus. In the year 1237. their
Prince George, was slain by Battus the King of the Tartars;
whereby the Russians being brought under the
subjection of the Tartars, their Princes were dependent
on them. After a long time they at last freed themselves
from this slavery under their Prince John,
         John. son of Basilius
the Blind, who began his Reign in the year 1450. 
Under his Reign Russia was first united into one considerable
Body, he having subdued most of these petty
Princes, which had divided Russia among them, especially
the Dukes of Tiver and of Great Novogrod, in
which City 'tis said he got a booty of three hundred
Cart loads of Gold and silver. This Prince built
Juanogrod, a Castle near Narva. 
        §. 2. Basilius. Him succeeded his son Basilius who took
Pleskeu, which was formerly a free City. From the
Poles he also took smolensko, but was soundly beaten by
the Astracan Tartars, who at the same time ransacked
the City of Moscovy. 
         John Basilewitz. Him succeeded his son John
Basilowitz, a cruel Tyrant,1533. who conquered the two
Kingdoms of the Tartars of Casan and Astracan, and

united them to Muscovy. He used the Livonians very
•atharously, having killed one Furstenbergh the Master
of the Order of Knighthood there, which was the occasion
that the City of Reval and whole Tethland surrendered
themselves to swedeland, and all the rest of Livonia to
Poland. He was at first victorious against the Poles, but
afterwards stephen Batori took from him Plotzko and several
other places. He died in the Year 1584. and unto
him succeeded his son Theodore Iuanowitz▪
         
         Theodore Iuanowitz. a very
simple Prince, against whom the swedes waged War about
Ingermanland. 
        § 3. This Theodore dying without Issue, his Brother
in Law Boris Guidenow did by his Intrigues obtain the
Empire,Boris Guidenow. but with very indifferent success, especially
after the supposed Demetrius began to contend with
him for it;1605. during which Troubles he died. His son
Theodore Borissowitz was proclaimed Great Duke of
Muscovy, but the Muscovites having afterwards for the
most part sided with the supposed Demetrius, he was taken
Prisoner and murthered, after he had but six Months
enjoyed the Title of Grand Duke. What became of
the supposed Demetrius,
         1606. and how Basilius Zuski took
upon him the Imperial Dignity, we have related before. 
To this Zuski, Charles IX. King of swedeland offered
his Assistance against the second supposed Demetrius,
which he at first refused to accept of. But afterwards,
when the other began to be too strong for him,
he earnestly desired the same, promising to surrender
to Charles as an acknowledgement, Kekholm. The King
sent to his Assistance Pontus de la Gardie with some
Thousand Men, who were very serviceable to the
Muscovites; nevertheless they made a great many Evasions,
refusing to deliver up these places which they had
promised before; wherefore the swedes took them by
Force, and thereby united Carelia and the rest of Ingermanland
with the Kingdom of sweden. How this
Basilius Zuski was delivered up to the Poles, how the
supposed Demetrius was slain, and Ʋladislaus Prince of
Poland made Duke of Muscovy, had been related before. 
§ 4. Michael Fadorowitz. At last Michael Fadorowitz son of the Patriarch
Theodore Mikitowitz, born of the Daughter of John
Basilowitz maintained himself in the Empire,1613. who having
concluded a Peace with sweden and Poland▪
          restored
tranquillity to the Muscovites. 
         1645. Him succeeded his son
Alexius Michaelowitz,
         Alexius Michaelowitz. who in the Year 1653. falling
upon the Poles, took from them smolensko and Kiovia,
and committed great depredations in Lithuania. 
         1656. And
having entred Livonia took Dorpt, Koenhusen and several
other places of less Note, but was obliged to raise the
siege of Riga with great Loss. And by vertue of a Peace
made with swedeland, was obliged to relinquish them all
again. In the Year 1669. one stephen Ratzin raised a
Rebellion against him, and having brought under him
Casan and Astracan, commited great depredations all
over the Country, but being taken Prisoner, received his
due reward, and the rest were reduced to their former
obedience. And because some of the Cosacks had submitted
themselves to his Protection, he was thereby
engaged in a War with the Turks, wherein he got but
little Advantage. He died in the 1675. Him succeeded
his son Theodore Alexowitz a young and sickly Prince,Theodore Alexowitz. 
of whom we can say nothing as yet. § 5. The Genius of this Nation. Of the Qualifications of the Muscovites, nothing
very praise-worthy can be said. For among them there
is no such Education as among most other European Nations,
Reading and Writing being the highest Degree
of Learning among them, and the Learning of their
Priests themselves does not go further than to be able
to read a Chapter out of the Bible, or to read a piece of
a sermon. They are also jealous, cruel and bloody-minded;
insupportably proud in prosperity, and dejected
and cowardly in adversity. Nevertheless they
have such an Opinion of their own Abilities and Merits,
that you can scarce ever pay them sufficient Respect. 
They are very fit for and cunning in the Trade of Usury,
but are of a servile Temper, and must be kept under
by severity. At all sorts of Games and sports their end
is with blows and fighting; so sticks and Whips are the
usual Instruments among them. They are of a strong

Constitution, able to undergo all sorts of Fatigues, even
Famine and Thirst. In Field-Fights and sieges they are
worth nothing, because they are soon brought into Confusion,
and are themselves of Opinion, that other Nations
are their Masters in this Point. But they defend a
Fortress to the utmost, not only because they are very
fit to undergo hardships and all sorts of misery, but also
because they know it is present death to them if they return
home after they have surrendred a Fortress by accord. 
Nevertheless, they do endeavour to bring their
soldiers under better Discipline, for which purpose, they
make use of a great many scotch and German Officers,
who are to instruct them in all manner of Exercises as
practised among other European Nations. But they do
not allow that the Muscovites should serve abroad and
learn themselves the perfection of Military Arts and Exercises,
because the Grand Duke stands in fear, that if
they should grow too knowing, they might be for making
Innovations at home. § 6. The Nature of the Country and Commodities. The Territories of the present Grand Duke of
Muscovy are of a very large extent, yet so▪ that a great
many parts are meer Wildernesses scarce inhabited at all. 
The Muscovites have at home great plenty of Corn,
Cattel, all sorts of Game, Fish, salt, Furrs and all other
Necessaries. They have a great many Commodities fit
for exportation, especially, Furrs and their precious sables,
which are esteemed at a high Rate among their
Neighbours, salt-Fish, Casiarr, Hides, Tallow, Wax,
Honey, Pot-ashes, soap, Hemp, and the like. But the
Commodities which are imported to them are silk, stuffs,
Gold, silver and Woollen Cloths, Tapestry, Pearls and
Precious stones, spices and Wines, but the latter not
in any great Quantities; Tobaco is now a prohibited
Commodity there. They keep it for a constant Custom
in their way of Trade, not to buy with ready Money,
but to exchange Commodities for Commodities, and it
is against the Constitutions of Muscovy, to export any
Coin. Their greatest Trade is at Archangel, which way
the English first found out in the Year 1553. But since
that time the Hollanders and Hamburgers have followed
their Example. Before that time, this Trade was carried

on by the way of Narva and Reval, but tho' this
was the shorter way, yet did the foreign Merchants not
care to be so much in subjection to the swedes and Danes. 
There is also a considerable Trade carried on with the
Persians upon the River of Wolga by the way of
Astracan. 
        § 7. Form of Government. The Form of Government here is an absolute
Monarchy; the Grand Duke, whom they call in their
Native Language Ozar, being not tied up to any Laws
or Rules, unto whom his subjects are obliged to pay
Obedience without reserve, so that they are no more
than slaves, which also sutes best with their natural Constitution. 
And therefore this absolute Power of the
Prince is a great addition to his strength,strength of the Country. since he cannot
only raise some Hundred Thousands of Men at the
first Command, but also has vast Riches and prodigious
Revenues. These do accrue to him, not only out of the
Taxes and income of so vast a Country, but also because
the Grand Duke himself has the monopoly of sables,
and if I am not much mistaken, also Farms out all
publick Inns, Taverns and Ale-houses himself, which amounts
to a prodigious Revenue in a Country where
the Nation is much addicted to drinking. He makes also
his Presents to Foreign Princes and Ambassadours in sables,
but receives in lieu of them Gold and silver. Besides
this, it is a common Custom with him, to set a
new stamp upon Crown Pieces, and to oblige his subjects
to take them for double the value: From whence
it cannot be supposed but that this Prince must lay up
vast Treasures. Muscovy also enjoys this Advantage before
other states, that it is not to be attacked on the
backside, because its Territories are on the North-East
side surrounded by a vast unnavigable sea, and vast
Wildernesses. § 8. Neighbours of Muscovy. The Persiant. 
          The Neighbours of Muscovy are on the Eastside,
the Persians. These two states cannot hurt one
another much, the Caspian sea, unaccessible Countries
and vast Wildernesses being their common Borders;
wherefore it is not worth their while to extend their

Conquests upon one another. But they may be serviceable
to one another by making a Diversion to the
Turks. 
         Tartars. The Tartars are woublesome Neighbours to the
Muscovites, who make no account of Faith or Alliances,
but make a Trade of Robbing and Plundering, against
whom there is no Remedy, but to kill them as fast as
one can; and this is not so easily to be done, because
they are very nimble. The Crim-Tartars are the most
mischievous to Poland, to hinder their Incursions, the
Muscovites are obliged to keep a considerable number of
Horse upon the Frontiers, and they give them sometimes
a Diversion, with the help of the Donisque Cosacks,
and the Nagage and Calmuck-Tartars. If the Muscovites
could maintain themselves in Kiovia, and a part of the
Ʋkraine, it would serve them at once to bridle these
Robbers, and for a Bulwark against the Turks. For the
Turks do not immediately border upon Muscovy, but by
the Country of the Crim-Tartars, who being Vassals of
the Turks, they make use of them like their hunting
Dogs. Wherefore it is of great consequence to Muscovy,
that the Turks do not become Masters of the whole Ʋkraine,
since thereby they would be enabled with the help of
the Cosacks and Tartars to do great mischief to Muscovy. 
        The Muscovites ought to have a watchful Eye over
the Poles,
         Poland. they being so situated, that they may do the
greatest mischief to Muscovy, especially since the Poles
are much better souldiers than the Muscovites in the
Field. But the Muscovites have at present a great Advantage
against Poland, since they are possessed of smolensko,
severia and Kiovia, which cover their Frontiers
on that side. Muscovy need not fear any thing much
from that side where it borders on sweden,
         sweden. not only because
it is able enough to defend it self there, if every
thing is quiet at home, but also because the swedes are
not ambitious to make any more Conquests on that side,
since to maintain such large and far distant Countries,
would be more hurtful than profitable to their state. 
And the Kings of sweden have of late shewed no great
inclination to fight with the Muscovites. But if the swedes
in conjunction with the Poles should attack the Muscovites,
         
they would put them very hard to it; whereas
also the Muscovites may prove very troublesome to swedeland
if they should join in conjunction with the Enemies
of swedeland. Nevertheless, the Muscovites ought not to
make any great account upon an Alliance with Denmark,
because they are far distant from one another, and
therefore cannot revenge themselves upon one another;
if one of them should put a Trick upon the other, and
as soon as he has obtained his aim, leave the other in the
lurch: Neither have the Muscovites hitherto appeared at
any general Treaties. "
"17","CHAP. XII. Of the spiritual Monarchy of Rome: or, of
the Pope. § 1. Politick Reflections upon Popedom. THE Pope may be considered two different
ways: First, As far as the Articles which
are taught by him and differ from other Christians, are
agreeable or disagreeable with the Holy scriptures, and
consequently useful or prejudicial to salvation, which
Consideration we leave to Divines. secondly, As far
as the Pope is not only possessed of a considerable Principality
in Italy, but also pretends to be the sovereign
and supreme Head of Christendom, at least in spiritual
Matters, and in effect, exercises the said Power in
those states of Europe which profess themselves of the
same Communion with him. This second Consideration belongs to the Politicians,
for this spiritual sovereignty does introduce great alterations▪
and interferes with the supreme Civil Power;
nay, circumscribes and maims it. Wherefore since Religion
has been so interwoven with the Civil Interest, it
belongs to the perfection of an understanding Politician,
to be well instructed whence this spiritual Monarchy had
its Original, and by what means it hath so mightily increased
and is preserved. From whence also will appear,
of what nature are the chiefest Controversies now
in vogue among Christians in the Western Parts of the
World, how far they are owing either to the various
Interpretations of the Holy scripture, or to worldly
Interest; so that from thence a Wise Man may easily
judge, whether at any time these Controversies are likely
to be composed or not. 
§ 2. Now to look back to the first beginning of things,
we find, that before the Nativity of our saviour the Inhabitants
of the whole Universe, except the Jews, lived
in gross Ignorance as to spiritual Affairs. For what was
commonly taught concerning the Gods, was for the most
part involved in Fables and most extravagant absurdities
'Tis true,The Blindness of Heathens in Matters of Religion. some of the learned among them, have pretended
to give some rational Account concerning the Nature
of the Gods and the state of the soul; but all this
in so imperfect and dubious a manner, that they themselves
remained very uncertain in the whole matter. 
They agreed almost all of them in this Point, that mankind
ought to apply it self to the practice of Vertue,
but they did not propose any other Fruits, but the Honour
and Benefit which from thence did accrue to Civil
society. For what the Poets did give out concerning
the rewards of Vertue and punishments of Vice after
Death, was by these who pretended to be the wisest among
them, looked upon as Fables, invented to terrify
and keep in awe the common People. The rest of the
People lived at random, and what the Heathens called
Religion, did not contain any Doctrine or certain Articles
concerning the knowledge of Divine Matters. But
the greatest part of their Religious Worship consisted in
sacrifices and Ceremonies, which tended more to sports
and Voluptuousness, than to the Contemplation of Divine
Things. Wherefore the Heathen Religion did neither
Edify in this Life, nor afford any Hopes or Comfort
at the time of Death. § 3. The Constitution of the Jewish Religion. At that time the Jews were the only Nation
unto whom God had revealed the true Religion, which
could lead Mankind in the way of salvation. Nevertheless,
there was a vast difference betwixt that and
the Christian Religion, not only because the Jewish Religion
represented the saviour of the World and the
Fountain of salvation in Types and Promises; whereas
the Christian Religion comprehends the reality and accomplishment
of the same; but also because the Jewish
Religion was cloathed with a great many and those very
burthensome Ceremonies: And some of them being accommodated

to the natural inclination of that Nation,
they proved an obstacle to the general reception
of that Religion by all Nations: This ceremonial
part being like a Wall, whereby the Jews were
separated from other Nations. 'Tis true, all other Nations
were not excluded from receiving salvation through
the Belief in the saviour of the World who was to come. 
There were also some among the Jews, who were very
careful, and applied themselves to the conversion of such
as they kept Correspondence withal. But it was not
decreed by God Almighty to send all over the Earth at
that time his Delegates or Apostles, instructed with
peculiar Gifts to call all Nations to unite themselves
with the Jewish Church: And what was done by some
private Persons in converting of Infidels, was of no great
consequence in comparison of the whole World. Besides
this, the Jewish Nation being at that time the selected
People of God, adorned with great Prerogatives, and
having the possession of the only Temple of God, was
grown so proud, that the Jews despised all other Nations
besides themselves. They being also obliged by
the Institution of their Ceremonies, not to converse too
familiarly upon several accounts with other Nations;
this occasioned a mutual hatred betwixt the Jews and
them, which was a main obstacle to the propogation of
the Jewish Religion. Neither could other Nations easily
digest this, that as often as they were to attend the
solemn and publick divine service, they were first to
travel to Jerusalem, as if it were not in their power to
build a Temple equal to the other near home. Besides
this, such as received the Jewish Religion, were esteemed
among them one degree below the Natives, which was
the reason why very few could resolve for the Jewish
Religion's sake, to be despised among them as Foreigners. § 4. The Christian Religion is proper for all the world. But the Christian Religion is not only much
clearer, and also has other great Prerogatives above the
Jewish, which Consideration we will leave to the Divines:
But it is also freed from those Circumstances
which were particular to the Jewish Religion, and endowed
with all Qualifications requisite for an universal

Religion; wherefore every one is obliged to receive and
embrace it, which deserves particularly to be remarked,
that hereby we may investigate and penetrate to the very
bottom, the propriety and genius of the Christian Religion. 
For here is no particular place appointed by God
Almighty for performing in publick the Divine service,
nor can any place claim a Prerogative before another,
so that no Nation henceforward has any occasion to
make exception about the remoteness of the Temple;
but in all places you may lift up holy Hands unto him,
no Temple in the World having any particular promise
appertaining to it that God will sooner hear your Prayers
in that than in another. No Nation has according
to the Christian Religion, a precedency before another,
whereby one may claim a Prerogative above the other. 
Here is no Jew, no Greek, no Bond nor Freeman, but
they are all one in Jesus Christ. Here is no particular
Family or Tribe appointed by God for the publick administration
of Divine service as it was among the Jews;
but none is excluded here, provided he be endowed with
the necessary Qualifications. There is no Article in the
Christian Religion, which forbids us to cultivate with others
either familiarity, or to render to one another the
Duties required from us by the Law of Nature. It is purely and by it self considered,Not contrary to Civil Government. quite separated
from all worldly Ends and Interests; yet is her Doctrine
not in the least repugnant to, or alters Civil society
or Laws, as far as they are consonant to the Law
of Nature, but it rather (tho' that is not her main intention)
confirms the same. There is nothing to be
found in the Christian Religion, which is destructive to
the Ends of Civil society, or which hinders us from
living honestly, quietly and securely under the protection
of Civil Magistrates, or from executing in every respect
the highest Civil Power according to the Law of Nature,
true Reason and the Necessities of the state, or
from administring all Offices and performing such Duties
without offending against the Rules of Christianity,
as are requisite for the maintaining a state established
according to the Law of Nature. The Christian Religion
rather promotes all these things, expresly commanding
us strictly to observe every Commandement

of the Law of Nature, and especially those where no
temporal punishment could be conveniently inflicted by
the Civil Constitutions, and to perform our Duty with
all Faithfulness and Zeal, as far as the same is consonant
with Honesty and the Law of Nature. No other Religion or Philosophy comparable to it. 
        Wherefore not any Philosophy or Religion whatsoever
is in this point to be compared with the Christian Religion,
which may be evident enough to all who will
make a true comparison betwixt this and all the rest. 
And every body is therefore obliged as he hopes to answer
for his soul before God, not only to receive the
Christian Religion, but also all sovereigns and Magistrates
ought for the above-mentioned reasons, and out
of a Duty belonging to their Office, to introduce and
maintain it. It is objected, that the Effects of the Christian
Religion are not so visible, nor that the Life and
Conversation of a great many Christians is not different
from that of the Heathens and Turks; it is to be observed,
that this Fault is not to be imputed to the Christian
Doctrine, but to the Inclinations of such as profess
the name of Christians, but will not in earnest apply
themselves to alter their evil Inclinations, and to live according
to the wholesome Precepts of this Religion. § 5. Concerning the outward Government of Religion. As what we have hitherto said, can scarce be denied
by the more understanding sort, so there arises now
a Question, viz. Whether, according to the Doctrine of
the Christian Religion it is absolutely requisite, that the
outward Direction or Government of the same be committed
to another, besides him who has the supreme Civil
Power in a state? or, which is much the same,
Whether according to the Christian Doctrine, it be necessary
that the outward Government of it be lodged
with the whole Body, or one of the Clergy in particular
independent of the supreme Magistrate? Or, whether
there ought to be but one sovereign Administrator
of the Christian Religion, on whom all other Christian
states ought to depend in this Point? Or, which some
take for the same thing, whether every state ought to
be governed according to its own Constitutions and Interest?
Or whether all other states are obliged to be

slaves to one, and to promote the Interest of that one,
with the Detriment and Ruin of their own. What is meant by the external Government of Religion. 
        By the outward Direction or Government of the
Christian Religion, we understand the Power of constituting
certain Persons for the exercising of the publick
Divine service, and the supreme Jurisdiction over
their Persons; the supreme Administration and Direction
of such Possessions as are dedicated to Religious
services. The Power of making Laws for the outward
maintenance of Religion, and the determining of
such Differences as may arise among the Clergy under
what pretext soever it may be, and such like. We
make a great difference betwixt the outward Direction
of Religious Affairs and betwixt the Ministry of
the Church, which consists in teaching, preaching and
administring of the sacraments, all which, doubtless
belong only unto the Clergy. This Question also is to be
understood of a Church already planted and established,
not of a Church that is to be planted and established. 
For since the Christian Religion owed its Original to
Divine Revelation, no humane Power could pretend to
have any Direction in the same, before this Doctrine
was throughly proposed and taught by such as had an
immediate Authority for so doing from God Almighty. 
For when our saviour after his Resurrection did send
his Disciples as Delegates and Apostles throughout the
whole World, to publish and introduce the Christian
Religion, they received their Commission for Preaching
every where not from the supreme Civil Magistrates, but
from God himself: wherefore Kings as well as the common
People were obliged to acknowledge them as immediate
Messengers of God, and obediently to submit themselves
to their Doctrine; and it would be next to an absurdity
if any one should pretend to a Direction in such Matters,
as he was not instructed in before. From whence
arises this Consequence, that what has been said is to be
understood of such sovereigns or supreme Magistrates
as themselves profess the true Christian Religion, but
not of those who are Infidels or erroneous in the chief
Articles of the Christian Faith. For to commit the Direction
of Religion to the latter, would be to make the
Wolf a shepherd. 
§ 6. The Consideration of this Question according to the nature of Religion in general. This Question may be considered in three-several
ways: First, Whether this Necessity arises from
the Nature of each Religion in general? Or, secondly,
Whether it arises from the Genius of the Christian Religion
in particular? Or, Thirdly, Whether the same is
imposed upon us by Divine Institution or the particular
Command of God? That it should proceed from the
natural Constitution of Religion in general, I am in no
ways able to find out. For Reason does not tell me,
that if I intend to serve God, I must of necessity make
a division in the state, and thereby introduce two different
Powers independent of one another. The dismembring
of the supreme Power, or such a doubleheaded
sovereignty in a state, administers continual
Fuel, which at last breaks out into Jealousies, Divisions,
and intestine Commotions. On the other hand, it is in
no ways contrary to Reason to serve God, and at the
same time leave the supreme Direction of the outward
Matters belonging to Divine service, to such as have the
supreme Power in the state; if we suppose that those
who have the supreme Power in their Hands, will not
impose any thing upon their subjects which is false or
erroneous. It cannot be denied, that as every one is
bound by the Law of Nature to serve God; also is it
at the same time in his Power to perform the outward
Ceremonies in such a manner as he believes they are
most pleasing to God. But after Civil societies were instituted,
that same Power is thereby devolved to those
who have the supreme Administration of Affairs in a Civil
society. And the most antient Fathers who did not
live under any regulated Government, exercised this
Power in their Families, which used to be transferred
to the Eldest son, as haereditas eximia (or a hereditary
Prerogative) if the Brothers, after the Father's death,
did resolve to live together in one Community. But
when afterwards Civil societies were instituted, the same
Power was transferred to the Heads of these societies,
and that out of a weighty Consideration: For if every
one had been left to his free Choice in this Point, the
various and different Ceremonies in the Divine service
must needs have introduced Confusions, Divisions and

intestine Commotions. And tho' by the Jews the publick
Ministry was hereditary to one particular Family,
yet the inspection and supreme Direction was among
them reserved to those who had the supreme Civil Power
in their Hands, as the same is practised among most
other Nations. § 7. According to the Nature of the Christian Religion in particular. Neither can any Reason be given why the Christian
Religion is particularly so qualified, as to imply a
necessity, that the abovementioned Direction should be
committed to any other than the supreme Magistrates,
tho' it contains something more than is taught us by the
Light of Nature; since we suppose that by vertue of this
directive Power, they ought not to impose any thing upon
us contrary to the Word of God, nor be a hinderance
to the Priests in performing the Ministry according
to the Ordinances of God in the Holy scriptures. 
Neither can I find out any Reason, why the supreme
Magistrates should want means duly to qualify themselves
for this Administration or Direction. At least,
they may let this Direction be exercised under their Authority
by such as have acquired sufficient abilities for
the same: In like manner as sovereigns exercise their
Power by others in Civil Affairs, so the Power of making
Laws was never denied to appertain to sovereigns,
tho' it is certain that a Doctor or Professor of the Law,
ought to be better instructed in them than is required
from a King. For both in these and other Matters, sovereigns
ought to act with the Advice of such as have
applied themselves throughly to such Affairs. And as it
is against the Interest of a Good and Wise King, if this
Power be not well exercised, so it is both his Duty and
Interest to see the administration of Religious Matters
well performed. For the more zealous and earnest he is
in maintaining the Christian Religion, the more obedient
and better qualified his subjects are likely to be,
and he may the better hope for the Blessing of God Almighty. 
Neither can any thing be alledged why God
Almighty should not as well afford his Assistance to a
Christian and Orthodox sovereign as to any other,
to perform this Government praise-worthily. Lastly,
because the Christian Religion does not in any other

way derogate from Civil Ordinances and Laws, or from
the Power of Civil Magistrates as far as they are founded
upon the Law of Nature; so it is not to be supposed
that it disagrees from this in this one Point, except a positive
Command of God can be alledged for the proof of
this Assertion. Whether there be such a Command in
the Holy scriptures, which expresly forbids sovereigns
to intermeddle with this Direction, and allows the same
to others in the highest degree of sovereignty without
any dependency at all, those are obliged to prove, who
endeavour to maintain this Assertion. In the mean while
we will inquire into the first Occasion, and by what degrees
this Ecclesiastical Monarchy was established in the
Western Churches. § 8. First propagation of the Christian Religion. The Apostles therefore having after the Ascension
of our saviour, according to the Instructions received
from his own Mouth, begun to spread the Doctrine
of the Christian Religion in far distant Countries, met
with great approbation in a short time, both among the
Jews and other Nations; but more especially among the
Common People, which having hitherto lived in gross
Ignorance and in a miserable Estate, very joyfully received
this Doctrine, which enlightened and comforted
them in the miseries of this Life. The Apostles also
themselves, who were of mean Extraction and of no
great Authority, used to converse most among this sort
of People, as having the most easie access to them as
their equals. But Men of Quality and Learning did
scare at first think it worth their while to apply
themselves diligently to search into the bottom of this
Religion, and very few of them would profess it. The Methods of God in Establishing the Christian Religion. 
        If we may inquire into the Reasons why it was the
pleasure of the Wise God to choose this way of planting
the Christian Religion, it seems very probable, that
God was not pleased to introduce the Christian Religion
by the Power and Authority of Civil Magistrates,
nor by the Assistance of Learned Men, because it might
not be deemed hereafter a state Trick, or a Philosophical
speculation; but that whenever a due comparison
might be made betwixt the slender beginnings and prodigious
encrease of this Religion, the World might from

thence conclude, that the whole was something above
humane Power. And because the Learned had proved
unsuccessful with all their subtilties in their Discoveries
concerning Divine Matters; and that socrates and some
others who were sensible of the vanity of the commonly
received superstitions, and had condemned them as such,
had not been able to abolish those, and in lieu thereof,
to introduce a better Religion; God Almighty was willing
to convince the World of the Vanity of worldly
Wisdom, and to shew, how easie it was for him to effect
this great Work by the means, even of poor
Fishermen. Besides this, the Doctrine of the Apostles
seemed to be full of absurdity to the Philosophers and
Politicians, the same being founded upon, and begun
with Jesus who was crucified. For it appeared very
strange to them that the Apostles should acknowledge
him for the son of God and their saviour, who was of
a hated and despised Nation, who having lived without
any great splendour, or performed any great Heroic Actions;
had besides this, not made himself Famous throughout
the World by long study or Preaching, but had in
his younger years suffered a most infamous Death. And
this is the reason why the Jesuites, when they teach the
Christian Religion among the refined Chineses, do not
begin with the Doctrine of the Passion of Christ; but
argue first with them out of the Principles of natural
Religion, and so at last come about to this Article of
the Christian Faith. But whether these Fathers by this
method are likely to be more successful than the Apostles
I will not determine here. Way the meanest first converted. It may also be alledged,
that God was pleased to deliver the common People among
the Heathens, before great Men, out of their misery
and darkness; because the first were seduced by the
latter, and upheld in their superstition; for these, tho'
they were sensible of the Vanity of the Pagan Religion,
yet did not do their utmost endeavours to search after a
better. Wherefore God Almighty by first drawing away
the common People from Paganism, did undermine
the whole structure, which was forced to fall of
it self. since the simplicity and credulity of the common
People were the Foundation stones of the Pagan
Religion. 
§ 9. Persecution of the first Church. The Christian Doctrine therefore having been
most of all, at first, spread abroad among the common
People, as I have said before, it was grievously oppressed
and persecuted afterwards by the Roman Emperours;
for in the Territories of the Roman Empire it had
its first beginning and chief increase. One of the
main occasions of these Persecutions was their Ignorance
of the true nature of this new Religion, or what was
the main end of it; since they saw the number of the
Christians daily encrease, who all despised the Pagan
Religion. The Emperours thought it below their high
station to make a due enquiry into the Foundation of
this Doctrine, and there were very few among the first
Christians that were fitly qualified to represent their Doctrine
in due form to People of Quality. The Calumnies against the Primitive Christians. These therefore
used to be led away by the false suggestions of the
Enemies of the Christians, who insinuated to them, that
the Christians in their nocturnal Assemblies, did practise
all sorts of Debaucheries much after the manner as formerly
used to be practised at the Festivals of Bacchus, or
else that they were then Plotting against the state. There were also not a few among the Romans,
         The Politick Reasons of the Romans against it. who
being averse to any Innovation whatsoever, were of
Opinion, that since the Roman Empire had stood in a
flourishing Condition several Ages past under the antient
Religion, the same ought not to be abrogated; especially,
they did think it in no ways becoming the common
People to pretend to an Innovation and to more
Wisdom than their sovereigns. The Christians also having
among themselves a certain Form of Ecclesiastical
Government, this rendred them suspected to the Romans,
who looked upon them as such that were for setting up
a Faction against the state, and erecting a new society
in it, and so to divide the Empire, and at last make themselves
Masters of it: some also there were, who perceiving,
that the more the numbers of the Christians increased,
the less frequented were the Temples of the
Heathens, and that the Roman Empire began to decline
and received great shocks; they perswaded themselves
that these Misfortunes befel them, because those Gods
through whose Assistance the Roman Empire arrived to

the Pinacle of its Grandeur, were now despised among
them, and therefore looked upon the Christians as an
Atheistical Generation, endeavouring to over-turn the
very Foundations of Religion. And because the Christians
refused to adore the Idols, notwithstanding the
Emperours Commands, and suffered the most prodigious
Tortures and Death with constancy and even Joy; they
were treated like a perverse and obstinate sort of People
by the Romans, who encreased their Cruelties to maintain
their Authority against them. But no sufficient
Reasons can be alledged for the justification of these
Persecutions against the Christians, which ought to be
considered no otherwise than unlawful Tyrannies, and
pernicious Abuses of the supreme Civil Power. For their
subjects had received this Religion according to the
express Command of God, which could nor ought not
to be opposed by the Civil Power; the Magistrates as
well as the subjects being obliged to receive it, except
they would grosly sin against God Almighty. Neither
could their Ignorance serve them for an excuse, since
this being a new Doctrine, it was their Duty to take
due information concerning the same, before they had
sent the Innocent Christians to Execution, only, because
they refu•ed to obey the Commands of their sovereigns,
which ought not to oblige them to Obedience in this
Point. For no body ought to give sentence of Death
against any one before he is duly informed concerning
the nature of the Crime, he is accused of. §. The first Church Government. 10. And because the sovereigns did at first not
concern themselves for the welfare of the Christian Religion,
the Christians therefore did without their assistance
constitute a Ministry and the outward Church
Government among themselves, which was maintained
among them as well as it could. For this is common
to all societies which are instituted without the consent
of the supream Magistrate, that the Members thereof
are forced to agree among themselves, which way to
order their Affairs best, and to Constitute certain Rules,
and Governours for the management of the societies:
Else, according to the Rules of Policy, founded upon
the Law of Nature, the outward Government of Religion

belongs to the sovereigns. But because the Magistrates
would not perform their duty at that time,
the Christians were obliged to Constitute Ministers of
their own accord, who received their maintainance from
the Charity of good Christians. And if any Errors
did arise, or other matters happened of such consequence,
that the same could not be decided by one assembly,
several of these Assemblies used to consult among
themselves concerning the matter in question, or
leave the determination to an Assembly of such Mininisters
as were next at hand. Tho it is certainly else
not to be allowed in a state, that private persons should
Constitute a society among themselves, consisting especially
of a considerable number; yet the Assemblies and
synods of the antient Christians are not therefore to be
deemed unlawful Meetings; since their only aim was
the exercise of their Religion, which being commanded
them by God, ought not to have been opposed by any
human Power. Neither is it reasonable, that because
the Magistrates were careless both of their Duty and
their own salvation, the rest also who had knowledge of
the true Religion, should lose the benefit of their salvation;
against which no Civil Power ought to extend
its Jurisdiction. And, as it is allowable for every body
to defend himself with his own strength and Weapons,
if Magistrates either can or will not protect him; so,
if a sovereign will not do his Office as to the preservation
of my soul, I have as much more right to take
care of it without him, as the soul is dearer to me than
the Body; and as by the exercise of the True Religion
my Fellow subjects are less endangered, than by a violent
defense of my own person; for no body by becoming
a subject in a Civil society, does thereby renounce
the priviledge of taking care for his soul and
Body. Otherwise no doubt is to be made, that if it
had been the Will of God to introduce the Christian
Religion by the Conversion of the Emperours and
Kings, these would with their Commands have assisted
the Apostles in their Office, thrown down the Temples
of the Idols, abolished the Pagan Idolatry, and would
according to the instruction of the Apostles, have
Constituted the outward Church Government, and

maintained it afterwards. For it is evident enough,
that this has been the manner of proceeding, as to this
point in other Countries, where the Christian Religion
has been first introduced into the state, by the authority
of their sovereigns. §. What persuasions arise thence. 11. Nevertheless because the first Christians were
obliged, when the Magistrates failed in their Duty, to
regulate and Constitute a Church Government among
themselves, this has occasioned the rise of several Errors,
which are of no small consequence. For, some have
from thence, endeavoured to make this inference, that
the people, as they stand in opposition to sovereignty,
has an original and inherent Right to Elect Church Ministers. 
Tis true a Minister ought not to be obtruded
upon an Assembly against their will, especially if they
have a lawful exception against him; because he would
edifie but little in his station; nevertheless, it is not
from hence to be concluded, that, because some Assemblies
have been obliged to provide themselves with Ministers
when the Magistrates did neglect their Duty,
therefore the same Right is ever since Originally in the
People. For without this supposition an Assembly has
as little right to call and Constitute a Church Minister,
as to dispose of Publick Offices and Employments
in the state. And if in some places the Common
People or some others have such a Right, it is
enjoyed either by connivance, or a concession from the
supreme Magistrate, whom we suppose to be a Christian
and Orthodox. some also have been endeavouring to
draw from thence this Conclusion, viz. That the outward
Church Government is separate and distinct from
the supreme Civil Power, and that it ought to be administred
either by the whole Clergy, or else to depend
absolutely on one single person of the Clergy; so that,
according to this supposition, there must be in each
Christian state two distinct Bodies independent of one another,
one of which must be called the Ecclesiastick
(Ecclesia) the other the Politick state, (Civitas) and
each of them to be sovereign in its Government. 
But, tho this has been made use of sometimes, when
Magistrates were quite negligent of their Duty, this

ought not to be drawn into Consequence, when Magistrates
are ready, duely to execute their Office. Neither
does it follow, that the same power which belonged
to the Apostles at that time when the Church was first to
be Established, is now devolved to such Church Ministers
as have not an immediate Vocation from God in the Established
Church. For the Office of the Apostles was particular,
and very different from the Church Ministry, as it is
exercised now adays; in like manner as the outward
Church Government is very different from the Ministry. 
And as every lawful Church Minister is therefore not
immediately an Apostle, so the King is therefore not
immediately a Priest. And tho the Christian Religion
ows its Original to God, and is above human reason;
nevertheless the supreme Magistrate may be capable of
having the outward direction over it, with the assistance
of such persons as are best versed in such Affairs. 
And, from what has been said, this Conclusion may be
made: viz. That the practice of the Primitive Church
as to this Point of the outward Church Government,
is not to be made a perpetual and universal Rule of the
Church Government in a state, which is under the Jurisdiction
of a Christian and Orthodox Magistrate. For
that practice was accommodated to the Circumstances
of their Affairs then: But, where both the whole
People and the sovereign have received the Christian
Religion, the case is quite different, and implies not
any necessity that the state should thereby become a
Body with two Heads. § 12. Constantine could not quite alter the former state of the Church. After Constantine the Great had embraced the
Christian Faith, the Church began to get another Face,
the sovereign being then fitly qualified to take upon
him the outward Church Government. Nevertheless
the said outward Church Government could not be so
immediately and regularly ordered, as if from the first
beginning the sovereigns had received the Christian Religion;
For, there were a great many remnants left of
the former provisional Church Government, which afterwards
occasioned great abuses in the Western or
Latin Church. For, it was scarce possible for these
Emperours, who passed then but for Novices in the

Christian Religion, to make use at first of their Power
in Ecclesiastical Matters, and to bridle the Authority of
the Bishops and Clergy, that were very backward to part
with it. They were rather obliged to keep fair with
them, and to make use of their assistance to Establish
themselves in the Throne, since most of their subjects
being then become Christians paid a profound Veneration
to their Priests. The first Christian Emperors also
made use of several Ministers and Officers in their
Courts, who were as yet Pagans; wherefore it seemed
not just, that Matters concerning the outward Church
Government, should be determined by a Council, whereof
some Members were Heathens. This was the reason why the Vocation of Bishops
and other Ecclesiasticks was performed for the most
part according to the Customs introduced before. Of making Bishops. And
not only such Controversies as arose concerning certain
Articles of Faith, but also of such as had a relation to
the outward Order and Government of the Church,
and all other differences of moment among the Clergy
of the higher Rank were brought before the Councils,
or the Assemblies of the Clergy where these did pretend
alone to have the right to Preside and to give their
Votes; Tho it is certain that not only the right of calling
them together belongs to the sovereigns, who also
for a considerable time have exercised that power; but
also the direction and Presidentship of such Assemblies:Of Presiding in Councils. 
whatever matter is to be debated there, does at least belong
to the Prince, if their Decrees shall pass afterwards
for, and have the power of a Law or a definitive
sentence in the state. Indeed the supreme Magistrates,
no more than the Clergy can pretend to a right
of introducing new Articles of Faith, or of explaining
the scripture according to their own pleasure: Nevertheless,
the whole Duty of a Christian being contained
in the whole scriptures, which God has commanded
to be published for the benefit of Mankind,
and not to be committed, like sibylline Oracles, to the
custody of certain Priests; and since others as well
as the Clergy have the opportunity to comprehend the
sense of the Holy scripture, it seems not at all contrary
to reason, that the Civil Magistrates should have

at least the supreme direction of these Assemblies,
where matters concerning the different interpretations
of the scripture are to be debated. From hence also
this benefit will accrue to the Publick, that thereby the
extravagant Heats and immoderate Passions, which are
commonly obvious in these Disputes, may be moderated,
matters may be debated with prudence, and not
stretched too high out of a fondness of contradicting,
nor that any one by malicious interpretation of his
Words and Opinion may fall under slanders and Censures,
or the Excommunication be thundred out without
necessity against the innocent. And because the
first Christian Emperours did either neglect this their
Right, or had no opportunity of exercising it, this occasioned
great confusion in some Councils:Abuses in the Council•. From hence
also the Pope took an opportunity, after he had set
himself above the Western Bishops and Councils themselves,
to take upon him an Authority to decide Controversies
even concerning Articles of Faith, to introduce
such Canons or Ecclesiastical Laws in the Church,
as he thought most proper for his Interest and state,
and by pretending to the highest Jurisdiction to exempt
the Church from the Jurisdiction of the Civil Magistrates:
For when once this Opinion was established,
that all these Matters did belong of right to the Clergy
only, without having any respect to the Civil Power,
the Pope did pretend to the same by the same Right,
by which he had set himself above the Clergy and the
whole Church. §. Of the Episcopal Jurisdiction. 12. Besides this it was the Custom among the
Antient Christians, that they very seldom pleaded their
Causes, according to the admonition of s. Paul, before
the Pagan Judges: But, in case of differences among
themselves, they used to refer the same to the decision
of a Bishop, that by their Contests they might not
give any occasion of scandal to the Heathens, since it
might seem unbecoming, that those who made profession
of despising worldly Riches, should quarrel among
themselves about the same. This Custom as it was very
useful and praiseworthy at that time; so because it was
not Abrogated, but rather confirmed afterwards by the

Christian Emperors, tho the Courts of Justice were
then Governed by Christian Judges, the Bishops afterwards
pretended to a formal Jurisdiction, which did
not only derogate from the Authority of Temporal
Judges, but also the Bishops were thereby diverted from
performing such Duties as properly belonged to their
Office. There was also another Custom among the first
Christians, that if a scruple arose concerning nearness of
Blood in Marriages,Concerning Marriages. they used to take the Opinion of
the Priests in this Case, and if any differences did arise
betwixt married People, it used to be referred to the
Arbitration of the Priests; who at the time also when
the Nuptials were Celebrated, used to give them their
Benediction and Pray with them. This, if in itself
considered, very good beginning, furnished an occasion
of great Abuses afterwards, the Pope having from
hence taken a pretext to subject all Matrimonial Affairs,
concerning Divorces, Nullities of Marriages, successions,
Inheritances, and the like, of the greatest Consequence,
under his Jurisdiction, who, to render his
pretensions the more plausible, did make Marriage a sacrament. Besides this,Concerning Excommunication. the first Christians were very desirous to
recommend their Religion to the Heathens by a Holy
and Innocent Life, especially since some sort of Vices
were not punishable according to the Pagan Laws. 
Wherefore in the Primitive Church, if any one had
given a Publick scandal by his vicious Life, a certain
Church Penance was laid upon him, which at the utmost
did amount to this, that he was excluded from
the Communion of the Christians. Which Custom as
it is not unreasonable, so it may be of good use in a
Christian state, provided the Civil Magistrate have the
supreme direction, and take care that such a Censure
be not abused out of obstinacy or private ends and passion. 
Especially since these Censures have had such an
influence upon Civil societies, that in the Eighth Age
no body would Converse with any one that was Excommunicated. 
And this Power ought not to be given
to the absolute disposal of any one, except to the
sovereign, if you will not divide the sovereignty. But
in what manner the Popes have afterwards abused this

Censure, and extended it even to the Excommunication
of Emperors, Kings, and whole Commonwealths, and
by forbidding the Publick Exercise of Divine service,
Absolving the subjects from their Allegiance, and bestowing
their Kingdoms upon others, have forced them
to a compliance against their own Interest, is sufficiently
known out of History. Yet in the Eastern Empire
these Abuses did not grow up to the same height, for
the Emperors at Constantinople did at least so far maintain
their Authority against the Clergy, that they durst
not pretend to dominere over them. Besides that the
Eastern Bishop wanted an opportunity to set themselves
one above the other, because the Bishops at Constantinople
had no other Prerogative allowed him, but Precedency
of Rank above the others without his Diocess, but not
any Jurisdiction. §. The Origin of the Authority of the Popes. 14. But in the Western parts the Church afterwards
took quite another Face, since the Bishop of
Rome had projected a peculiar sort of a Monarchy,
which by degrees he brought to perfection, and has not
had its parallel ever since the memory of mankind, it
being founded upon quite other Principles, and upheld
by very different means from other states. The more influence
this Monarchy has had for several hundred years
together upon the states and Affairs of Europe, and has
been maintained with great Zeal by one, and opposed by
the other party, the more it will be worth our while, to
dive into the first Origin and Constitution of it, and to
alledge some reason, why in the last Age this Monarchy
was reduced to a tottering condition, but has recollected
its vigour in ours. From whence a wise Man also
may be able to judge what success may be hoped for
from the Projects of those, who are for reconciling the
differences betwixt the Protestants and Papists. Wherefore,
it may be said, that towards the increase of this
Monarchy, so pernicious to the supreme Civil Power,
has not a little contributed, tho afar off, the Barbarity
and ignorance,Barbarity and Ignorance contributed to it. which, after the decay of the Roman
Empire, did spread itself over the Western parts. 
For bad Wares are best vented in the dark, or at least
by a dim light: And an ignorant person is sooner prevailed

upon to believe ridiculous stories than a wise
Man versed in all sorts of sciences. There were several causes,The Causes of this ignorance. which promoted this barbarity,
which did degenerate afterwards into the worst
sort of pedantry, (whereas the former Age had been
sufficiently instructed with learned Men. ) One of the
principal ones was the Invasion made upon the Western
Provinces of the Roman Empire by those Nations, who
tho sufficiently Brave, were ignorant of Learning; which
occasioned for one or two Ages after great Changes in
the Government, bloody Wars, horrible disorders, and
all sorts of miseries in the Empire. And Learning being
the product of Peace and Prosperity, it is little regarded
in times of War, or during the Distractions of a state;
since then there is but little leisure time given for the
use of Books. The schools are commonly destroyed,
and the Teachers obliged to make shift, where best they
can, a Musquet being at such times of more use than
a school satchel. The school-Masters especially are
forced to shut up shop at such times, if the victorious
Enemy is ignorant of Learning, and makes no account
of Books. There are also some who affirm that the
Clergy was accessary to this barbarism. For, because
the Philosophers had under the Reigns of the Pagan
Emperours proved very mischievous to them, and afterward
under the Christian Emperours continued to oppose
themselves against the Clergymen especially, these
had conceived such a hatred against Philosophy, and
against all such as professed it, that they not only infused
the same into their Auditors, but also removed
out of the schools and took from the young students,
who were committed to their care, the Pagan Authors,
under pretence that they might otherwise be again infected
with the erroneous Principles of the Pagans, and
that it could not but be sinful for Christians to read such
Books as were filled every where with the names of the
Pagan-Idols, which they would not have as much as
named by Christians. They related a story concerning
s. Hierom how that he was whipped in a Vision with
Rods,s. Hierom's Dream. because he used frequently to Read the Works of
Cicero; and about the year 400. after the Birth of our
saviour; the Council of Carthage forbid the Bishops

the reading of Pagan Authors. And Learning being
in those miserable times become almost useless except
to those who intended to profess Divinity, and the
remnants of Learning being lodged therefore among
the Clergy, the main Institution in the schools was
only directed for that Purpose, and the rest of the
young Disciples were not very forward to dive much
into the secrets of Antient Learning. And that Ignorance
and Barbarism have greatly promoted the establishment
of Popery is evident enough to those, who will consider
that in a learned Age those Decretals which are
ascribed to the first Popes, could never have passed
Muster; which nevertheless have been made use of to
persuade the People that the Bishops of Rome have
exercised an Authority from the very beginning of Christianity,
to prescribe Laws ot the Christian World. But when afterwards the times proved more favourable
in Europe,
         The Pedantry introduced into the schools. and the Popes perceived that some
among the most considerable Nations of Europe could
not be longer kept in a gross Ignorance, they introduced
into the schools, over which they had assumed the supreme
Direction, the most miserable sort of Pedantry,
which is also maintained by their Creatures with great
earnestness in their schools to this very day. But above
all the rest, it seems that the ignorance of the true
Principles of Policy, has had a main stroke in laying
the Foundation of Popery, for want of which they
were not then duely instructed concerning the Foundation,
Nature, and Perfection of the supreme Civil
Power, and that no state could be esteemed well Established,
where the supreme Civil Power was either divided
or diminished. The Greek and Roman Polititians prejudicial to Monarchy. And the Grecian and Roman Politicians
themselves had divulged most pernicious Doctrines
concerning the division and mixture of the supreme
Power, whereby they had enamoured the People
with an Aristocratical or Democratical sort of Government,
but infused into them such a hatred against
Monarchy, that it was a common Maxim among them,
that the more they could incr••ch upon the Authority
of the Prince, the more it must turn to the advantage
of the state. In this pernicious Opinion a great many
were confirmed by the Tyrannical proceedings of the

Emperours, who were mortally hated by most of their
subjects. It was therefore no great wonder, that at
the time of this general Ignorance the knowledge of
true Policy was not taught among the Christian Clergy,
since it seemed to them to be repugnant to their Profession. 
From hence it was, that, when by degrees the
Foundation of the Ecclesiastical sovereignty was laid,
few did throughly understand of what Consequence
this undertaking was, and how prejudicial it would
prove to the supreme Civil Power, when ever it could
be brought to perfection. And we see even to this day,
that in those schools, which are under the care of the
Popish Clergy, the Principles of true Policy are either
neglected, or at least so disfigured that they may not
be hurtful to the Authority of the Popes, but rather
serve to support it. §. Why Rome was made the place of Residence of the Ecclesiastical Monarchy. 15. But the chief reason, why Rome was chosen
for the place of Residence of the Ecclesiastical Monarchy,
seems to be, that this City had a particular Prerogative
of being the Capital City of the Roman Empire,
where the Christian Religion at first had its r•se
and increase. For what is related concerning s. Peter's
Chair is nothing but a vain pretence, which may be
easily seen from thence, that afterwards the Bishop of
Constantinople had the next place assigned him after the
Bishop of Rome, only because that City was then the
place of Residence of the Emperour, and new Rome. 
And when afterwards the Western Roman Empire was
come to decay, and the City of Rome had lost its former
lustre, the Bishop of Constantinople disputed the
precedency with the Roman Bishop. After the Persecutions,
which the Christians had endured under the
Pagan Emperours, were ceased, and they afterwards
enjoyed their full Liberty, the Clergy began, under pretence
of introducing a wholesome Order in the Church
to Establish a particular sort of Government or Hierarchy,
the Bishops having then begun to claim a great
Prerogative above the Priests. The Bishops also were
made subordinate to one another, so that commonly
the inspection over the Bishops in a certain Province
was committed to the Bishop of the Capital City of the

same Province,Metropolitans. who being then called Metropolitans,
did afterwards, viz. about the Eighth Century most of
them assume the name of Archbishops. Four of them
were most eminent above all the rest, viz. The Archbishops
of Rome,
         Patriarchs. 
         Constantinople, Antioch and Alexandria,
these being then the four principal Cities of the
Roman Empire; and the Archbishop of Jerusalem was
added to their number, because of the Antient Holiness
of that City. And tho the Emperor Phocas, out
of a spite against the Patriarch of Constantinople, who
who would not approve of the Murther committed
upon Mauritius, did grant the precedency to Boniface
III. the then Bishop of Rome, who did thereupon
take upon him the Title of Oecumenical Bishop; yet
this Prerogative did not extend any further than to bare
Precedency, nor did imply any Power or Jurisdiction
over the rest, which the other Patriarchs never acknowledged. 
And a considerable time before, when the Bishop
of Rome pretended to put his Commands upon the
Bishops of Africa, and for that purpose alledged a
Canon of the Council of Oliva, which was falsified,
they sent him back a very smart Answer. And in the whole business there is no footsteps of a
Divine Institution to be met withal,Of the Popes Power. the same being
purely Human, nor can any reason be alledged, why the
Bishop of Rome possesses the first Rank, other than why
he of Antioch has the third among them. And because
one state cannot prescribe Laws to another, therefore
if any Prerogatives have been granted to the Bishop of
Rome by the Roman Emperors, or the Antient Councils,
(which were nothing formerly but an Assembly of the
Clergy of the Roman Empire,) the same do not oblige
any other state, nor can they extend beyond the
Bounds and Jurisdiction of the antient Roman Empire. 
But if we put the Case that some Christian Princes or
states have afterwards allowed to the Pope a certain
power over the Church in their Dominions, this was
either done because they either understood not the true
nature of this Power, or because they were deceived by
the Popes. In the first Case the same is to be deemed
nothing else but a Treaty or Alliance with the Pope,
the better to Administer the Church Affairs with the

Pope's Direction. such a Treaty or Alliance as it Originally
proceeds from the Consent of that state; so
the same may be Annulled again, in the same manner
as other Alliances are, whenever it proves prejudicial
to the state, or the Pope begins to abuse the Authority
granted him by the state. But if the Pope has either
by Fraud or Imposition obtained his Power over other
states, these so misguided and thus surprised states,
have a right, as soon as they have discovered the Fraud,
and are convinced of their Error, to shake off such an
unjust Usurpation, and besides may demand satisfaction
for the dammages sustained by these impostures. §. Further Increase of the Ecclesiastical sovereignty. 16. Neither could the Bishops of Rome extend
their Power over the Western parts all at once, but it
was introduced from time to time, by degrees and by
various Artifices, and under several pretences. For,
when they had once fastened their Paws, they did not
retreat till they had obtained their pretensions, tho they
were several times denied admittance. They did very
wisely take hold of that opportunity which presented
itself, and was the chiefest of all in my jugdment,
when the Emperors began to choose other places of
Residence besides Rome,
         What contributed to it. since by their constant presence
there they might easily have kept under the ambitious
designs of the Bishops. For the Bishops of Constantinople,
who questionless were no less proud and ambitious
than those of Rome, could never gain this Point. 
The next thing which mainly contributed to this
Power, was, that afterwards the Western Empire was
divided into several new Kingdoms, erected by barbarous
and Pagan Nations; and these having been converted
to the Christian Faith with the assistance of the
Romish Church, thought themselves obliged to pay to
her a profound respect, and to honor her as the most
antient and the principal of the Western parts. To recite all the particulars here is not for our purpose,The Popes Confirmation of Bishops. 
it will be sufficient to touch upon some of the
main Points: it is therefore to be remarked, that since
the Fifth Century the Bishops which lived on this side
of the Alpes used to go to Rome to visit the sepulchres
of s. Peter and s. Paul out of a superstition or a Devotion

very common in those days, or because they thereby
intended to testifie their firm adherency to the Christian
Faith. This voluntary Devotion was afterwards by
degrees changed into a necessity, and such as neglected
it, used to receive severe rebukes. From hence it was easie
for the Popes afterwards to pretend that the Bishops
ought to receive their Confirmation from Rome. some
other Bishops and Churches also, that were Novices in
comparison of the antient Roman Church used to refer
themselves to, and ask the advice of the Church of
Rome concerning some Matters of great Consequence,
and the true use and interpretation of the Canons. And
when they once perceived at Rome that their answers
were taken as decisions, they began to send their Decrees
before they were demanded, under pretence that
Rome being the first seat of the Christian Bishops it
ought to take effectual care that the Canons and Ecclesiastical
Laws were duely put in Execution. Under
the same pretence they made themselves immediate
Judges over the Differences arisen betwixt the Bishops,
and incroaching upon the Right and Jurisdiction of the
Metropolitans, used to depose such Bishops, as according
to their Opinion had not a right Ordination; or
such as were accused of some enormous Crimes, they
obliged to appear before them at Rome to defend their
Cause. And if there were some that pretended to
a Prerogative, or to obtain an Exemption from the
Canons, they did Travel to Rome, where they were
kindly received and incouraged in their demands, whereby
the staple of Dispensations and Favours to be
granted, was established at Rome: And if any one had
lost his Cause before the ordinary Judge, he used to
Appeal to Rome, where he was kindly received and
incouraged. The French Historians relate, that, because
the Emperor Henry had made the City of Arles the Capital
City over seven Provinces, the Pope Constituted
the Archbishop of the said City his Vicar in France,
for fear lest the said Archbishop might by degrees attempt
to make himself Patriarch of France. And this
Archbishop chose rather to have the inspection, tho precariously,
over seventeen Provinces, into which France
was divided at that time, than to be the Head only of

seven in his own right. This Man to add the more
Authority to his Commision, did as much as in him
was, endeavour to Establish the Popes Authority
there. Afterwards in the Eighth Century, when great
Disorders and Debaucheries were become frequent among
the Monks and Clergy,Of the Monk Winifred. 
          an English Frier, whose
name was Winifred, and who afterwards called himself
Boniface, did out of a particular Zeal take upon himself
the Reformation of the Manners and Lives of the
Clergy; and did endeavour to Establish the Christian
Religion in several parts of Germany, but especially in
Thuringia and Friezland. This Man, to acquire the
greater Authority to himself, had entirely Devoted himself
to the Interest of the Roman Chair, from whence
he received the Episcopal Pall, and the Title of Archbishop
of Mayence, having also been Constituted by
Pope Gregory III. his Vicar, with full Power to call
Councils, and to Constitute Bishops in those places
which were by his assistance Converted to the Christian
Faith, and with ample recommendations to those
Nations, and to Charles Martel, the then Grand Master
of France, that he should take him into his protection,
which he very willingly did. And when afterwards
his son Carlomannus shewed a great forwardness
to have the Church Discipline regulated, Boniface
was very willing to take upon him this Office to the
great advantage of the Roman Chair. He also at the
request of Carlomannus called a Council in Germany,
and at the request of Pepin several synods in France,
where Boniface always was President in the quality of
Legat of the Roman Chair. In the first Council the
Clergy signed a certain Confession of Faith, whereby
they obliged themselves, not only to maintain the Catholick
Faith, but also to remain in constant Union
with the Roman Church, and to be obedient to the successours
of s. Peter. This Boniface also was the first,
who put it upon the Bishops of Germany to receive the
Episcopal Pall from the Pope, who sent it to the Bishops
of France without their request, thereby to unite them
with the Roman Chair. And when once these Ornaments
were become customary amongst them, they were put

upon them afterwards as of absolute Necessity, and
the Episcopal Function was forbidden to be exercised
by them before they had received these Ornaments. Besides this,Annals. the Popes assumed to themselves an Authority
of giving leave to the Bishops to remove from
one Episcopal see to another, and obliged all the Western
Bishops to receive their Confirmation from Rome,
for which they were obliged to pay a certain summ of
Money as an acknowledgement, which was since converted
to Annals. The Popes also by making void the
Decisions of the provincial synods or Assemblies, overthrew
their Authority; wherefore when every body
plainly perceived that the Decrees of these Assemblies
could produce no other Effects but to be continually annulled
by the Popes, without as much as hearkening to
any Reasons, they were by degrees quite abolished. 
Pope Gregory VII. also forced the Bishops to swear an
Oath of Fealty to the Pope, and by a Decree forbid
that none should dare to condemn any one that had appealed
to the Pope. They were also not forgetful in
sending Legates or Nuncios to all places, whose business
was, to exercise in the name of the Pope the same Authority
which had formerly belonged to the Bishops,
Metropolitans and Provincial Assemblies. § 17. Riches of the Church. This growing Ecclesiastical sovereignty was the
more prejudicial to the supreme Civil Power, the more
the Church daily increased both in Numbers and Riches. 
The first Foundation of the Wealth of the Church was
laid by the Liberality and Charity of Princes and other
great Men, who were of Opinion, that they did a very
agreeable service to God Almighty if they were liberal
and bounteous towards his Church and the Clergy. 
And after they had once perswaded the People, that by
doing good Works, among which the Gifts and Donations
for Pious uses had the first place they could and
must deserve Heaven from God Almighty; this Liberality
was increased to a high degree. Yet the voluntary
Contributions of the People not being able to satisfy
the avarice of the Clergy, which increased together
with their Riches, other ways and artifices were found
out to empty the Peoples Purses, and a great many unnecessary

Institutions introduced which were to be purchased
for Money. Then it was that the saying of Masses
for the living and the dead, Purgatory, Indulgences,
Dispensations, Pilgrimages, Jubilees, and the like, were
introduced without measure. They had besides this, always
a watchful Eye over such as were at the point of
death, since they knew that Men were commonly not
so addicted at that time to their worldly Riches, which
they were else to leave to their Heirs who often rejoiced
at their Death: Nay, they were not ashamed to make
a profession of begging. Among other Tricks,The Policies of the Popes in the Croisade. the Popes did in the Eleventh
and the following Century turn the Croisadoes to their
great Advantage. For in these expeditions after the
People had once received the sign of the Cross to assist
in the recovery of the Holy Land, the Popes pretended
to the supreme Command and Direction; they took the
Persons and Estates of such as had received the Cross
under their particular Protection, exempting them
thereby from the Civil Jurisdiction both in Civil and
criminal Causes, and rendring their Dispensations and Indulgences
more frequent and flourishing than before;
the Pope's Legates did dispose of such Alms, Collections
and Legacies as were given for that purpose, and
under the same pretext received the Tenths from the
Clergy; nay, even pretended to put their Commands
upon Princes to receive the Cross themselves. These
they imployed afterwards against such as were declared
by them scismaticks or Hereticks, whose possessions
they used to confiscate and bestow upon those who had
proved serviceable to them, without asking the Advice
of the sovereign, who durst not but invest these with
those Countries that were presented to them by so high
a Hand. § 18. Multitude of Ecclesiasticks No less did the number of Ecclesiasticks increase
proportionably to the increase of the Riches of the
Church, because there were not wanting such as were
willing to have a share of them without taking much
pains. For it was not thought sufficient to have an
ordinary Minister, Chaplain and others necessary for
the exercising of Divine service belonging to each

Church, but also each Cathedral had a Chapter of Canons,
and there were great numbers of Persons of high
and low Quality that were forward in taking upon
them these profitable and in no ways but then some Functions,
because the inconveniency of Celibacy which the
Pope in the Eleventh and the following Century forced
upon the Ecclesiasticks not without great trouble and reluctancy
was sufficiently recompenced by the Honours
and Revenues which they enjoyed quietly in their several
stations. Besides,Fryars and Nu••. an innumerable multitude of Fryars and
Nuns settled themselves all over Christendom. This
sort of People began first to appear in the World at the
time of the great Persecutions, but in the Fourth and
following Centuries did multiply their numbers to a
prodigious degree. In the beginning they lived upon
what they could get by their Handy-work; a great
many used to give their Goods to the Poor, tho' voluntarily,
and lived under the Direction of the Bishops, according
to a Discipline prescribed in the Canons. In
the seventh Century especially, Fryars and Nuns were
much in vogue in those Western Parts, which were every
where filled up with Monasteries and Nunneries
built by the encouragement of Princes and other great
Men that endowed them with great Revenues. But
when the Charity and Liberality of the People seemed
almost to be exhausted by the great Charges bestowed
upon so many rich Monasteries, and yet there were not
enough to contain all such as were desirous to enter into
this sort of Life; at last in the Thirteenth Century the
Order of the Mendicant-Fryars was erected:Mendicants. These
made a great shew of Holiness, because they would not
be taken for such as were forward to choose a Monastick
Life to live in plenty, but for such as had taken a resolution
to bid farewel to all the Pleasures of this World,
and at the best,The Motives to embrace this manner of Life. maintain themselves by Alms. A great
many have embraced this severe Order, out of an Opinion
of a particular Holiness and Merit, which they believed
did belong to this Order, or rather an Ecclesiastick
Ambition; the Pride of Mankind being so great
and natural to some, that they did not think the Commands
of God sufficient, but rather would receive Heaven

from God Almighty as a desert than as a gift, and
were ambitious of having a preference before others,
even in the other Life. some there are who embrace a
Monastick Life out of desperation, some out of laziness. 
A great many are by their Parents and Relations sent into
a Monastery out of superstition or Poverty, and to prevent
the ruin of a Family by the division of the Estate
among a great many Children. And out of these Fryars
the Pope has chosen his Regiment of Guards, which he
lays in Garrison not only to plague the Laiety, but also to
curb the Bishops and the rest of the Clergy. It was for this
reason that the Pope did uphold the Fryars with so much
zeal against the Bishops, in the Tenth Century, especially,
when they withdrawing themselves from the Jurisdictions
of the Bishops, did submit themselves to the immediate Authority
of the Pope. And the Popes know so well how to
handle them, that tho' there are great Jealousies on foot
betwixt their several Orders, as for example, betwixt
the Franciscans and Dominicans, they nevertheless keep
so even a ballance betwixt them, and so equally dispose
of their Favours towards them, that one Order may not
oppress another, or that any of them may have any reason
to complain of the Pope's partiality. These Fryars also used to interfere often with the regular
Clergy,Prejudicial to the regular Clergy. as pretending to a great share in the Legacies
and Burials of the richer sort, to the direction of
Consciences and the administration of the sacraments. 
From hence did arise a continual envy and hatred from
the Bishops and regular Clergy against these Fryars,
who being upheld by the Pope's Favour, were not concerned
at their anger. And therefore whenever any
Bishop attempted any thing against the Pope's Authority,
these Fryars with their clamour and noise pursued him
every where like so many Hounds, and rendred him
odious to the common People, amongst whom they were
in great veneration, through their outward appearance
of Holiness; and from thence it came to pass, that the
Bishops who opposed the Pope's Authority never could
make a great Party among the common People. Besides
this, the Fryars always kept a watchful Eye over
the actions of the Bishops, giving continual advices concerning
them to their Generals residing at Rom•, whereby

by the Popes were enabled to oppose timely any design
intended against their Authority. And these Fryars
proved the main obstacle, why the Bishops could not so
effectually oppose the Pope's Authority which he assumed
over them, so that being destitute of means to help
themselves, they were forced to follow the current. Tho'
it is also certain, that some of them were very well satisfied
with it, as believing that they did participate of the
Grandeur of their supreme Head, and that thereby
they should be exempted from the Jurisdiction of the
Civil Magistrates, which was more dreadful to them than
a foreign Jurisdiction exercised by those of their own
Order, from whom they had all the reason to expect
more Favour. Nevertheless it is also undeniable, that a
great many Bishops, especially among those on this side the
Alps bear a grudge to the Pope's Authority to this very
day, which evidently appeared at the Council of Trent,
where the French and spanish Bishops did insist very
closely upon this Point, that it might be decided, whether
Bishops are not obliged to Residence by the Law of
God, which is also the Opinion of the Jansenists (as they
are called) in France and the Netherlands. The more
refined sort did easily perceive what their Intention was
by making this Proposition. For if God had commanded
them this, it must also be a consequence that he had
given them means and instructed them with sufficient
Power (qui dat jus ad finem, dat jus ad media) and
that therefore they were not obliged to go to Rome first,
and to purchase an Authority to exercise their Function. 
The Pope met with great Difficulties before he could
surmount this obstacle at the Council of Trent, wherefore
it is very likely that this will be the last Council,
since the Pope will scarce hereafter put his Grandeur to
the hazard and the decision of such an Assembly; which
also seems now to be of no further use, since the Jesuits
and some others have taught that the Pope is infallible
and above Councils, from whom they ought to receive
a confirmation, and a binding or obliging Power. But
let it be as it will, the Bishops are for their own sakes obliged
not to withdraw themselves from the Popes subjection,
since thereby they would fall under the Jurisdiction
of the Civil Power, and would be obliged to seek

for Protection from their sovereigns, who must be Potent
Princes, if they should protect them against the
Pope; wherefore they are now forced to choose the least
of two Evils. § 19. How the Church was freed from all Power over it. Tho' the Church was never so abounding in
Riches and in great numbers of Ecclesiasticks, yet was
it absolutely necessary, that the Pope if the intended to
establish an Ecclesiastical Monarchy, should not be in
any ways dependent on any Temporal Prince; and
that he should reside in a place which was free from all
subjection to any Civil Power but himself; that he also
should be possessed of such an Estate, as might be sufficient
to maintain his Grandeur, and not to be liable to
be taken away from him upon any pretence whatsoever;
where also his adherents might find a safe retreat
whenever they should be pursued by the Civil Power. 
To establish this was a business of a considerable time
and labour, neither could it be effected without great
opposition, and that by a great many Artifices and knavish
Tricks. And it is certain that as long as there was
an Emperour in the Western Empire, and as long as the
Empire of the Goths lasted in Italy, the Bishops of Rome
could not so much as think of this Greatness. How the Popes withdrew themselves from their subjction to the Emperours. But this
having been destroyed under the Emperour Justinian,
and Rome and Italy made a Province of the Grecian Empire,
then it was that the Popes took their opportunity
to exempt themselves from the Jurisdiction of these Emperours,
whose Authority was mightily decayed in Italy,
partly by the ill management of their Governours at Ravenna,
partly by their own weakness and want of strength;
for the Lombards were Masters in Italy, and in the times
of Justinian II. one Emperour was for ruining the other. 
Besides this, some of these Emperours were against the
adoring of Images, and Leo Isaurus quite ejected them
out of the Churches, because this adoration was wholly
degenerated into Idolatry, and as to the outward appearance,
the saints were more regarded than God himself. 
This undertaking was very vehemently opposed
by Pope Gregory II. who stood up for the Images, partly
because the Roman Chair found this superstition very
advantageous; partly because the Pope took it very ill

that the Emperour should undertake a Reformation in
Matters of Religion without his Knowledge and Consent,
and that at that time when he was busie to introduce
the Ecclesiastical Monarchy in the Western
parts; partly also, because he thought to have met with
an opportunity to withdraw himself from the Jurisdiction
of the Grecian Emperours. The better to obtain
his Aim, he stirred up the Romans and Italians, who hitherto
had been under the Obedience of the Emperours,
to refuse to pay them Tribute; and the Governour residing
at Ravenna, endeavouring to maintain the Emperour's
Right, was slain in a Tumult. Whereby the Jurisdiction
and Power of the Grecian Emperours was abolished
in those parts of Italy, and these Countries began
to be free and independent on any Foreign Jurisdiction. § 20. The Pope seeks for Protection in France. 
          By these means the Pope had freed himself from
the Jurisdiction of the Emperours of Constantinople, but
not long after he was threatened by another Enemy, who
being nearer at hand, was likely to prove more troublesome
to him than formerly the Emperours who lived
at so considerable a distance. For the Kings of the
Longobards endeavoured first to make themselves Masters
of those parts which were fallen off from the Emperour,
and afterwards of all Italy. They had already
taken Ra•enna, and there was none left in Italy who
was able to stop their Victories. The Popes were then
hard put to it, and knew not where to seek for Protection
except of the Kings of France, who at first endeavoured
to finish these Differences by an amicable
Composition, but the Longobards not being willing to
rest satisfied therewith, they resolved by force of Arms to
maintain the Italian Affairs. They were easily prevailed
upon to undertake this Business, not only because
Pope Zachary had approved of the Proceedings of Pepin,
who having abdicated the lawful King, was from a
Grand-Marshal become King of France; but also they
had thereby an opportunity offered them to make Conquests
in Italy, whereof the French Nation has been always
very ambitious. Pepin and afterwards Charles the
Great, having been so Fortunate in their Wars against

the Longobards, as to Conquer their whole Kingdom;
they gave to the Papal Chair all that Tract of Land
which had been formerly under the Jurisdiction of the
Grecian Governours. There are some who are of Opinion,
that to obtain this Gift, the Pope made use of the
fictitious Donation of Constantine the Great, which in
those barbarous times was easily imposed upon the
ignorant World. Besides this, the French Kings had
great Obligations to the Pope for the above-mentioned
reason, and were also fond of acquiring the name of
pious Princes, by bestowing liberal Presents out of other
Mens Possessions. For it was in those Days a common
Custom, that Men of all degrees made it their Business
to out-do one another in Liberality towards the Clergy. 
Nay, the Princes used to grant them these Possessions
without any incumbrances, that thereby the Ecclesiasticks
might be sure to enjoy free possession of what they
had bestowed upon them. These extravagant Donations
were none of the least Causes why the Clergy afterwards
did labour with so much vehemency to withdraw
themselves from the Jurisdiction of the Civil Magistrates,
as fearing that these extravagant Donations and Grants
might be recalled and declared void by their successours. 
Wherefore it has been always a Maxim of Wise Men. 
that Princes by granting extravagant Priviledges and
Gifts, made their subjects rather Jealous than Friends;
since those who have obtained them, living always in fear
that the same either in part or wholly, may be taken
away again, imploy all means so to establish themselves
as to be in a capacity to maintain themselves therein in
spite of the Prince. Those Learned Men who are of
an impartial Judgment, take it for granted, that the Pope
did pretend to exercise a sovereign Power over these
Countries granted to him by the French Kings, but that
the People refused the same, as being for maintaining
their Liberty; and thinking it very odd, that the Pope
who was an Ecclesiastical Person, should pretend to be
also a Worldly Prince. When therefore the Romans
mutinied against Pope Leo III. he was forced to seek
for Assistance from Charles the Great, who restored the
Pope. But on the other hand, the Pope and People of
Rome proclaimed Charles Emperour, whereby he was

put into possession of the sovereignty over that part of
Italy, which formerly belonged to the Jurisdiction of the
Governours at Ravenna, and the other remnants of the
Western Empire; so that the Pope afterwards enjoyed
these Countries under the sovereign Jurisdiction of the
Emperour, who therefore used to be called the Patron
and Defender of the Church, till the Reign of the Emperour
Henry IV. § 21. The Pope withdraws himself from the Obedience of the Emperours, and establishes an Ecclesiastical sovereignty. But the Popes began at length to grow weary
of the Imperial Protection, because the Emperour's Consent
was required in the Election of a Pope, and if they
were mutinous, the Emperours used to check them, and
sometimes turn them out of the Chair. To exempt
themselves from this Power of the Emperours over them,
the Popes have for a long time together imployed all
their Cunning and Labour before they could obtain
their Aim. They used to make it their constant Business
to raise intestine Commotions against the Emperours,
sometimes in Germany, sometimes in Italy, thereby
to diminish their Power and Authority. The Bishops,
especially in Germany, were always very busie, as being
dissatisfied that they were dependent on the Emperours,
who nominated the Bishops, and therefore joyned with
the Pope to assist him in setting up the Ecclesiastical sovereignty. 
The Reign of the Emperour Henry IV. furnished
them with an opportunity to put in execution their
Design, this Emperour by his Debaucheries and ill management
of Affairs, living in discontents and continual
broils with the Estates of Germany; and as soon as
Gregory VII. who was before called Hildebrand, a proud,
resolute and obstinate Man got into the Chair, he began
to exclaim against the Emperour, that the granting of
Church-Benefices did not belong to him, since he made
a Traffick with them, and sold them to all sorts of
People whom he installed before they had taken Holy
Orders. Pope Gregory excommunicates Hen IV. And when the Emperour resolved to maintain
his antient Right and Title, he excommunicated him,
and stirred up the Bishops and the Estates of Germany
against him, who made him so much work, that he
was obliged to resign his Right of Constituting of Bishops. 
The Pope under this pretext, did not only intend

to exempt the Bishops from the Emperour's Jurisdiction,
but the main point was to make himself sovereign
over Italy, and to make all the other Princes submit
to the Pope's Authority. And some are of Opinion,
that this Design might have been put in execution, considering
that Europe was at that time divided into so
many Principalities, and most of these Princes being
not very Potent, might either out of a Devotion,
or to avoid falling under the Jurisdiction of more Potent
Princes, submit themselves under the Pope's protection
and pay him Tribute. It is therefore not improbable,
that if three or four Popes had succeeded one
another, instructed with sufficient Capacity to cover
their Design with the Cloak of Holiness, and in the
mean while to uphold the Interest of the People against
the Oppressions of their Princes, the Popes might have
made themselves absolute sovereigns both in Temporal
and spiritual Affairs. Neither did the Pope only pretend to free himself
from the Emperour's Jurisdiction over him,The Pope endeavours to subject the Emperour. but also endeavoured
to make him his subject; for he pretended
to be his Judge, he summoned him before him to make
answer to the Complaints of his subjects, excommunicated
him, and declared him to have forfeited his Right
and Title to the Empire. And tho' his son, the Emperour
Henry V. did endeavour to recover what was forcibly
taken away from his Father, and made Pope
Paschal a Prisoner, whom he forced to restore to him the
right of Constituting of Bishops, yet were the whole
Clergy in Europe so dissatisfied hereat, and raised such
Commotions,1122. that at last he was obliged to resign the
same again into the Pope's hands. Much about the same time there were great Disputes
concerning this Point in England,
         Disputes in England about the investiture of B•shops. which were composed
in such a manner, that the King should not pretend
to the Power of investing of Bishops, but that these
should do Homage to him. 1107. The last of which the Pope
was very unwilling to grant, who would fain have had
the Bishops to be quite independent of the King, which
was the reason why he expresly forbid the Bishops in
France to follow this Example; but King Lewis VI. and
his successours did maintain their Right with so high a

Hand, that the Popes were never able to establish their
pretended Right in France. Neither did the Popes
think it advisable to fall out at once with the Emperour
and France, but that it would be more secure to have
one at hand to uphold them against the other; especially,
the Popes were not so much for weakening of France,
because they were not so nearly concerned with that
Kingdom, as for humbling the Emperours that were Potent
in Italy, and pretended to the sovereignty over the
City of Rome. Neither was Germany so intirely united
as France, and most Princes of Europe being then very
jealous of the Grandeur of the Empire, were very willing
to joyn with the Pope against the Emperours, under
pretence of upholding the Authority of the Holy Church
and Papal Chair. 'Tis true, the two Emperours Frederick
I. and II. did afterwards endeavour to restore
the antient Imperial Right, but were not able to attain
their aim, especially since Italy was divided into
the two Factions of the Guelfs and Gibellines, the first
whereof were for the Pope, the latter for the Emperour,
which caused such a Confusion in Italy, that the Emperours
could never afterwards reduce Italy to an entire
Obedience. And because after the death of the Emperour
Frederick II. the whole Empire was during that
long vacancy of the Throne, put into great Confusion
and Disorders, the succeeding Emperours found so much
work in Germany, that they were not in a Condition
to look after Italy, whereby the Pope had sufficient leisure
given him to make himself sovereign both as to
his own Person, and over the Possessions belonging to the
Church of Rome. 
        § 22. The Pope pr•tends to a Power over Princes even to depose them. But the Pope not being contended to have attained
this degree of Grandeur, quickly set on foot another
Doctrine, which was of far greater consequence, viz. 
That the Pope had an indirect Power over Princes, that
it belonged to him in his own Right to take Care how
they governed and managed their Affairs. For tho'
they did not expresly pretend in gross terms that Princes
did depend on them in Civil Affairs, yet they believed
that the supreme Ecclesiastical Power did entitle them
to an Authority to judge concerning the Actions of

Princes, whether the same were good or bad, to admonish
them, to correct them, and to command what was
fitting, and to forbid what was unfitting to be done. 
If therefore Princes waged War against one another,
the Pope pretended to have an Authority to command
a Truce to be made betwixt them, to bring their Differences
before him, and refer them to his Decision, not
without threatnings that he would not only excommunicate
them in their Persons, but also forbid the exercise
of Divine service and administration of the sacraments
throughout their whole Kingdom. They also did
believe it belonged to their Office to obviate all publick
scandals, to defend such as were oppressed, and to see
Justice done to all the World. It was from this
pretension, that they received the Complaints of all such
as pretended to be oppressed; nay, they went further,
for they sometimes took information concerning the Injuries
done by Princes to their subjects, and concerning
some Impositions laid upon the People, whereby the
People thought themselves aggrieved, which they forbid
to be levied upon them under the penalty of Excommunication. 
sometimes they used to declare the Possessions
of such as were excommunicated, forfeited, exposing
their Persons to danger, and releasing the subjects from
their Oaths of Allegiance, under pretence that the Government
of a Christian People ought not to be trusted
to the management of such as had rebelled against the
Church. This has been attempted against a great many
Crowned Heads, and put in execution against some of
them. This abominable pretension (as they perswade the ignorant)
was founded upon their fictitious Decretals upon
which they have built their Canon-Law,How they colour over this Power. which
grants to the Pope an unlimited Power over Christians,
by vertue of which, he may as the Common Father,
send out his Commands to all Believers, and admonish
them concerning all such Matters as belong to Religion
and their salvation, and in case of Disobedience,
lay punishments upon them. For that the Predecessours
of Gregory VII. did not make use of this Power (they
say) was because the preceeding Emperours, either kept
themselves within their bounds, or else the Popes lived an

ungodly Life. To give specious colours to these pretensions,
they made use of the Examples of Ambrose and
Theodosius; they used to relate how the spanish Bishops
had obliged King Wamba by way of penance to lay
down the Crown: As also, how the Bishops of France
had deposed Lewis surnamed the Pious, who afterwards
could not recover his Crown without the
Consent and Authority of another Assembly of Bishops. 
They alledged for another Example, how Fulco then
Archbishop of Rheims had threatened Charles sirnamed
the simple, to absolve his subjects from their Oaths
of Allegiance, if he made an Alliance with the Normans,
who were then Pagans. They supposed that it was without
question, that the Pope's Power did extend it self beyond
that of all other Bishops, since it was not limited
by any thing, except by the express Canons of Councils
and Decrees of the Popes, wherein nothing was
contained against this Power of deposing of Kings; and
(they say) it was not to be supposed that they could
have been forgetful of this point. And because they had
assumed a Power to give the Name and Title of a King
to some who either prompted by their Ambition or superstition
had begged the same from them, they supposed
that by the same Right, they might take away the Crown
from such as they esteemed unworthy of wearing it. They also had forbid to marry within the seventh degree
of Consanguinity, and the fourth of Affinity, whereby
they often met with an opportunity to be troublesome
to Princes: For because it seldom happened among
those of so high a Rank, but that one side or other
was within one of these degrees, they stood in
continual fear lest the Pope should disturb their Negotiations,
except they humbly begged for a Dispensation;
and in both cases the Popes knew how to make their advantage
of them. Lastly, the Popes having abundance
of Business to dispatch, did thereby draw the best and
most refined Wits to their Courts, who used to go thither
to look for Imployment, and to perfect themselves
in the great school of Europe. These were always for
promoting the Pope's Interest and Designs, from whom
they expected their promotion; besides that, the whole
Clergy did adhere to him as to their supreme Head. 

Pope Boniface VIII. did clearly give us to understand
his meaning at the Jubilee kept in the year 1300. when
he appeared sometimes in the Habit of an Emperour,
sometimes in that of a Pope, and caused two swords to
be carried before him as the Ensigns of the Ecclesiastical
and Civil Power. § 23. The Papal Authority opposed. But the Popes could not long enjoy this unsufferable
Usurpation in quiet, for it was so often called
in question, till they were obliged to draw in their horns,
and to make their pretensions a little more plausible. 'Tis
true, in the Business with the Emperours, the Henrys and
the Fredericks, they got the upper hand; nevertheless,
they met betwixt while often times with very indifferent
entertainment, and such things were sometimes published
against them as were little to their Honour, and from
whence it might easily be judged by those that were impartial,
that not the Glory of God, but their own Grandeur
was the chief aim of their undertaking. But when
Boniface III. pretended to play the same Game with
Philip surnamed the Handsome, King of France, he watched
his opportunity so well, and gave him such a blow, that
the Pope felt the smart of it. And to avoid the scandal
which the common People might take at these so severe
proceedings against the Pope, use was made of this
pretext, that what was done against his Person, was
not intended against the Vicar of Jesus Christ, but against
a pernicious Person, who by unlawful means was got
into the Chair, and that a general Council ought to be
called to free the Church from his Oppressions. But the ensuing schisms have proved the most pernicious
to the Popes Authority,The schisms much weakned their Power. as also the double Elections
which have been made at several times, when the Cardinals
being divided, set up two Popes at once, who
used by turns to excommunicate and revile one another,
and to maintain themselves in the Chair, were fain to
flatter the Kings, and acknowledge that they were beholding
to them. This Division was an evident sign, that
the Elections of these Popes had not been guided by the
Holy spirit, but been influenced by some ill Designs
and Intrigues. Wherefore it was also the Opinion of
the Wiser sort, that in such a case, neither of them ought

to be acknowledged as Pope, but that a new one ought
to be chosen, which was also put in execution at the
Council of Constance. The first schism arose, according
to my Opinion in the year 1134. or as some will have it
1130. when after the death of Honorius II. Innocent II. and
Anacletus were both chosen Popes. And tho' the first
had the greater party on his side, yet did the King of
sicily and Duke of Aquitam, vigorously uphold the latter;
and his adherents did after his death choose another in
his stead, who called himself Victor, with whom Innocent
made an agreement, so that he voluntarily relinquished his
pretension, and acknowledged him his superiour. But
after the death of Adrian IV. two Popes were again elected
at one time, viz. Alexander III. and Victor IV. To
the first adhered France, England, and sicily; to the latter,
the Emperour Frederick I. all Germany and the Clergy of
Rome And after his death, those of his party chosen three
successive Popes, all whom Alexander out-lived. These
used to make a common Trade to excommunicate and
revile one another, and each of them were fain to behave
themselves towards their Protectours, more like a
Client than a Master. But much greater was the schism
after the death of Gregory IX. when again two Popes
were elected at once, whereof one resided at Rome,
the other at Avignon. This schism lasted through several
successions, near the space of Forty Years; during
which time, both parties excommunicated one another
very frequently, and committed great Cruelties. France,
scotland, Castile, savoy and Naples, were of the side of
the Pope that resided at Avignon, but all the rest of Christendom
declared for the other at Rome. Both parties
took great pains to set out the great numbers of saints
that were of their party, and what Miracles and Revelations
were made concerning their approbation. And
both sides knew how to produce such Reasons, that at
last, there was no other remedy left them but to force both
the Anti-Popes to abdicate themselves at the Council of
Constance, and to choose a new one in their stead. The
last schism of all arose when the Council of Basil having
deposed Eugenius IV. 1433. did in his stead elect Felix V. 
Pope, unto whom the former would not submit. And
these Dissentions were continued till after the death of

         Eugenius, when Nicholas V. was chosen in his stead, unto
whom Felix for quiet sake, did resign the Chair upon
very advantageous terms in the year 1488. It is very easily to be imagined how these Divisions
did expose to publick view the secrets of these Fathers. Hence an occasion taken to bridle the Popes Power by general Councils. 
since from hence an opportunity was taken to
make use of the Assistance of the Councils to bridle the
Popes, and from the Popes to appeal to these which
were now made use of to terrify the Popes withal, whenever
they pretended to transgress their bounds. The
Popes could the less refuse to acknowledge the Power of
the Councils at that time, because Gregory VII. himself
after the quarrel betwixt him and the Emperour was
renewed, had proposed to call a Council to be held in a
place of security, where both Friends and Foes, both
the Clergy and Laiety might meet, to judge whether he
or the Emperour had broke the Peace, and to concert
Measures how to re-establish the same. Gelasius II. who
had Differences with Henry V. made the same Declaration,
adding withal, that he would rest satisfied
with what Judgment his Brothers the Bishops should give
who were constituted Judges in the Church by God
Almighty, and without whom, he could not decide a
Business of this nature. so Innocent III. had writ, that
he would not undertake to decide the Marriage Controversie
betwixt Philip Augustus and Engebourgh of Denmark
without consulting a general Council; for if he
should attempt any such thing, he might thereby forfeit
his Office and Dignity. Which words seemed intimate,
that a Pope for mismanagement might be deposed. And
when afterwards these and the like words were made
use of against the Popes, it was then too late to endeavour
to make them pass for Compliments; since it proves
often dangerous to be too modest in matters of such
consequence. Wherefore the Council of Pisa in the year
1409. did depose the two Anti-Popes, Benedict XII and
Gregory XII. in whose stead they chose another, viz. 
Alexander V. In the same manner the Council of Constance
did not only confirm the deposition of these two
Popes, but also turned out John XXIV. who was made
Pope after the death of Alexander V. In the same
manner the Council of Basil did with Eugenius IV. and

besides this made a Decree that neither at the Court of
Rome, neither in other places any mony should be taken
for the dispatches of Ecclesiastical Affairs. All which
as it shook the very Foundation of the Papal Chair, so
it was not to be admired that the Popes were very
averse afterwards to call the Council of Trent, and
were forced to make use of all their cunning, that nothing
might pass there to the prejudice of their Grandeur,
and that since that time they have bid farewel to Councils
for ever. §. Concerning the seat of the Popes being transferred to Avignon. 
          24. Among other divisions, this has proved very
prejudicial (as it seems) to the Authority of the Popes,
that Clement V. did transfer the Papal Chair from Rome
to Avignon, as I suppose, upon instigation of Philip surnamed
the Handsom, King of France, who having had
great differences with Boniface VIII. was Excommunicated
by him. To render this ineffectual, he thought
it the most proper way if the Pope resided in France,
and that thereby the like would be prevented for the
future; since it was very probable that the greatest part
of the Cardinals hereafter would be taken out of the
French Nation. The Popes made this City their constant
place of Residence for seventy years together, not
to mention that some of the Anti-Popes also did Reside
there. This changing of the seat carried along with it
several inconveniencies, which proved very prejudicial
to the Ecclesiastical Monarchy. For the Pope's Authority
was among other things also founded upon this belief,
that s. Peter had been at Rome, and by his presence
had Communicated a particular Prerogative and Holiness
to that Chair, and whether the same could be transferred
to Avignon seemed somewhat doubtful to a great
many; besides this, the Pope was then for the most
part obliged to comply with France, and to live as it
were at the Discretion of the French Kings. Tho also
the French, who then thought they had a great Catch,
have since complained, that they got little else by the
presence of the Roman Court than simony, and another
abominable Vice not fit to be named. Besides this
the Court of Rome being then kept among strangers,
as it were, out of its Natural Element its Faults were

the sooner discovered, and the whole the more despised. 
This removal also of the Court of Rome proved very
prejudicial to the Revenue of the Church in Italy. For
after the Authority of the Emperors in Italy came to decay,
each state was for living free, and being sovereign
itself, and the Factions of the Guelfs and Gibellines
caused most horrid distractions. And the Authority of
the Pope being vanished by his absence, they made bold
with the Church Possessions. Most Cities of the Ecclesiastical
state upon the persuasions of the Florentines
had sent away the Popes Legats, and acknowledged no
sovereign. The Emperor Lewis, surnamed the Bavarian,
who was at Enmity with the Pope, but in
great esteem among the Inhabitants of the Ecclesiastical
state, did pretend to the sovereignty over the same, as
being a Fief of the Empire, which he granted to such
as upheld his Party against the Pope. The Patrimony
of the Church was then but very slender, and tho the
Popes recovered part of it afterwards, they were obliged
to leave most in Possession of what they had got. But
the City of Rome was nevertheless at last forced to submit
to the Popes power, which it had resisted so long,
when Boniface IX. in the year 1393. put on the Bridle,
by building the Castle of s. Angelo. And Alexander VI. 
was the chief cause that the Ecclesiastical state was reduced
under the Obedience of the Popes. This Pope
had a Natural son, whose name was Caesar Borgia, but
who commonly is called Duke of Valence, from the
Dukedom of Valence, which he got with his Lady
Charlotte d' Albret. The Pope being very ambitious to
make this his son a great Prince in Italy, proposed this
expedient to him, that he must drive out these petty
Lords, which were then in Possession of the Ecclesiastical
state, and when he had made himself Master of these
places, he would confirm him in the Possession of them
for ever. He succeeded very well in this Enterprise,
having made away with most of these petty Lords, some
by Force, some by Treachery; for he used to stick at
nothing, alledging, that whatever he did could not be
done amiss, since he had received his Commission from
his Father, who was endowed with the Holy Ghost. 
And being reduced to the utmost want of mony, wherewith

to pay his soldiers, he and his Father agreed to
Poison the richest Cardinals at a Feast intended for that
purpose; some of whom they also knew to be averse
to their Designs. But the servant who had the management
of the business having out of carelesness filled the
Pope and his son a Cup out of the Poisoned Flasks,
the Father died immediately, the son narrowly escaping
by the help of some sudorificks. And not being able
so to influence the next Election, as to get one chosen
fit for his purpose, the whole design of Caesar Borgia
came to nothing. Tho after the death of Pius III. 
who sate but a few Weeks in the Papal Chair, Julius
III. a most mortal Enemy of Borgia was chosen in
his stead, who having taken into his Possession all what
he had got before, banished him out of the Country. 
Neither did this Pope rest satisfied, till he had recovered
all what formerly belonged to the Church, (except Ferrara
which was not reunited with the Papal Chair,
till about the latter end of the last Age, when the Legitimate
Race of the Dukes of Esté was extinct. This
Pope also prevented the French from becoming Masters
of Italy. 
        §. Luther gives a great blow to the Grandeur of the Pope. 25. But when the Ecclesiastical Monarchy seemed
to be come to the very Pinacle of its Grandeur, when all
the Western parts were either in Communion with, or
in Obedience to the Church of Rome, except some few
Remnants of the Waldenses in France, and of the Hussites
in Bohemia, and when just the differences arisen
betwixt Pope Julius II. and Lewis XII. which easily
might have occasioned another schism, were after the
death of the first happily Composed by Leo X. and all
the complaints against the Ambition of the Court of
Rome were almost extinguished, there was such a Revolt
made from the Chair of Rome, first raised upon a
very indifferent occasion, that a great part of Europe
withdrew itself from the Obedience of the Pope, who
was thereby put in danger of losing all. We will in
this, as we have done in all other matters, only relate
how far human Counsels and helps were concerned
therein. For the hidden Counsels and Works of God
Almighty, ought in our judgment rather to be received

with admiration and a submission, than to be
dived into with presumption. And what Tacitus says,
in a certain place, may conveniently be applyed here:
Abdi•'s numinis sensus exquirere illicitum, anceps, nec
ideo assequare, i. e. To search into the hidden designs of
God is unlawful, uncertain, nor are they to be penetrated
by us. Pope Leo of the House of de Medicis was an affable,The Vertues and Faults of Leo. 
         
and magnificent Man, very liberal towards all honest
and learned Men, who might have made a very good
Pope, if he had but had an indifferent knowledge of
Religion, and an inclination to Piety, whereas he was
very careless of both. He having lived very splendidly,
and by his Liberality and Magnificence exhausted the
Apostolical Chamber, and not being acquainted with
the Arts of acquiring Riches, made use of the Cardinal
Laurence Puccius, who at last, when all the other Gold
Mines were emptied, proposed the way of raising mony
by Indulgences. These Indulgences were therefore sent
abroad all over Christendom, both for the dead and the
living, Eggs, Milk, and the like were allowed to be
eaten on fast days. The several sums of mony thereby
to be raised, were beforehand assigned to certain uses;
All what was to be Collected in saxony and thereabout,
as far as to the sea side, having been granted to
Magdalen the Pope's sister; she to make the best of the
Pope's Grant, had committed the whole management
of her share to one Arcimbold a Bishop by his Title and
Coat; but who was most experienced in all the Genoese
Tricks of Merchandising. He again employed such as
did proffer the most, and had no other prospect than
the getting of mony. It had been formerly a Custom
in saxony that the Hermits of the Order of s. Austin
used to proclaim the Indulgences. But Arcimbold's Commissioners,
did not think fit to trust them at this time,
as knowing them to be expert in that Trade, and fearing
that they might not deal fairly with them, or at
least that they might not bring in more mony than used
to be gathered at other times. They chose therefore
the Dominicans to Preach up the Indulgences, which
the Austin Friers took very ill, as being thereby defrauded
of their Authority, Right and Profit. The

         Dominicans in the mean while, to show themselves well
qualified for this new Employment, did magnifie their
Ware to that extravagant degree, that their Auditors
were extremely scandalized at it; especially since the
Commissioners lived in continual debaucheries, and spent
with great infamy, what the poor Country Fellows
spared out of their Bellies, to redeem their sins. This
obliged Luther,
         Luther opposes Indulgences. a Frier of the Hermits Order of s. Austin,
to oppose these impudent Merchants of Indulgences;
and having duely weighed the matter with himself,
he in the year 1517. did affix 95. Theses concerning
this Point at Wittenbergh, and John Tezel, a Dominican
Frier, published some other Theses in opposition
to those, at Franckfort. Thus the Dispute
having been set on foot, each of them began to enlarge
himself upon the abovementioned Theses. But
Luther having upon his side both Reason and scripture,
his Adversary had nothing to alledge for himself, but the
Authority of the Pope and the Church. Wherefore
Luther was obliged to make an enquiry,Afterwards the Popes Power. upon what
Foundation the Authority of the Pope was built, and
in what condition the Church was at that time; which
led him by degrees unto the discovery of the Errors and
Abuses, which were crept into the Church, and to
an invective against the Impostures, and scandalous
lives of the Monks and Priests, and that it was a duty
incumbent upon the Magistrates to abolish these Abuses. 
And to this purpose, as also to oblige the Magistrates
to uphold his Doctrine, he spoke very magnificently concerning
the Nature and Grandeur of the Civil Power,
which the Priests hitherto had represented as despicable. 
By which means he at first got a great Party, and his
Doctrine was spread abroad every where. §. The Circumstances of these times. 26. But that we may the better understand the
Reason, why a Poor Frier was able to give such a blow
to the Chair of Rome, we must, next to the supreme
Direction of God Almighty, consider the circumstances
of these times, and what disposition there was at that
juncture of time in the minds of the People in General. 
First then, Luther's Propositions concerning the
Indulgences were very good and reasonable, and a great

many Divines, which afterwards opposed his Doctrine,
were at first of his side, as were also some Cardinals,
and George Duke of saxony himself. His Adversaries
were so perverse, that every body lamented their folly
and perverseness. Neither was it at first in the least
suspected, that things would go so far as they did. Luther
himself had at first not the least thoughts of falling
off from the Pope. The Emperor Maximilian had
no aversion to the Doctrine of Luther, and it is credibly
related, that, when he first heard of him, he did
say; that this Frier ought to be kept safe, since good
use might be made of him. some Monks only, and
these Commissioners, who were likely to be the losers
by it, did make such a clamour, and raised such tumults
by blowing up the Coals, that this small spark
broke out into a great Flame. Whole Christendom was
also in a miserable condition, it being quite overwhelmed
with Ceremonies; the perverse Monks, did
what they pleased, and had entangled tender Consciences
in their snares. All Divinity was turned into sophistry
New Doctrines and Propositions were broached,
without any regard, how they ought to be proved
and maintained. And the whole Clergy of all degrees
had rendred their Lives and Conversations odious
and despised to the World. The late Popes Alexander
VI. and Julius II. had been infamous for their
Pride, Treachery, turbulent spirit, and other such like
Vices, as were very ill becoming Ecclesiastical persons. 
such Bishops as were fit for something had quite entangled
themselves in worldly business; a great many
of them led a most scandalous Life, and were more expert
in Hunting, than skilled in the Bible. The Priests
and Monks were over Head and Ears in Ignorance, and
scandalized the Common People by their Debaucheries,
and their Avarice was grown unsupportable to every
body. Besides all this,The Ignorance of Luther's Adversaries. those who first pretended to oppose
Luther, were a sort of simple, miserable, and some of
them debauched wretches; these, when they saw Luther
maintain his Arguments in a manner which was not
common at that time, were soon confounded and put
to a nonplus, not knowing where to begin or to end. 

'Tis true, in former Ages also the Clergy had not been
free from Vices, but the Ignorance of those barbarous
times had served them for a Cloak. But after Europe
began to be restored to its flourishing condition, and all
sorts of Learning began to dispel the former darkness,
it was then that these abominable spots became more
conspicuous to the Eyes of the World. As the ignorant
Priests and Monks, who could not bear the
glance of this bright shining Light, were stark mad at
those who had restored Learning to Europe, and did
them all the mischief they could, and when they found
themselves worsted by them, used to make a Point of
Religion of their different Disputes, and to accuse those
of Heresie that were more Learned than themselves:
so these used to expose their folly, and as much as in
them lay to discover their Ignorance to the World. 
'Twas upon this account, the impudent Monks picked
a quarrel with John Reuchlin, whom they fain would
have made a Heretick; from whence that learned Gentleman
Ʋlrick van Hutten (if I remember right) took an
opportunity to expose them most miserably in Epistolis
obscurorum virorum. Whilst the War betwixt the Lovers
and the Persecutors of Learning was carried on with great
heat on both sides, Luther's Doctrine appeared in the
World. And because the Monks made it their business
to bring the most learned Men into the same Quarrel
which they had against Luther, in hopes to strike them
both down at one blow, this proved the occasion that
most of the learned Men in Germany did actually side
with Luther. 
         Erasmus favoured Luther. 
        It is also undeniable that Erasmus of Rotterdam
had a considerable share in the Reformation, for he
had before already discovered, and reprehended a great
many Abuses and Errors, he had rejected the school
Divinity, and recommended the reading of the Bible
and Fathers: he had ridiculed the Barbarity and Ignorance,
which was upheld by the Monks, and approved
at first Luther's Cause, tho he always excepted
against his violent and biting way of writing. His silence
alone proved very mischievous to Luther's Adversaries. 
For Erasmus being then esteemed the most learned
Divine of his Age, every body took his silence for a

kind of an approbation of Luther's Cause. And when
he afterwards published his Treatise de libero Arbitrio,
it made no great impression upon the minds
of the People, since it sufficiently appeared, that
it was rather writ to please others, than of his own inclination. 
Besides that this was not the main Point
in dispute, and Luther did refute sufficiently his Propositions. The Princes and Estates of Germany also having been
sufficiently convinced,The Princes of Germany dissatisfied with the Pope. that heavy Impositions had been
laid upon them of late under several pretences by the
Court of Rome, for no other purpose but to maintain the
Grandeur of the Ecclesiasticks at Rome, were extremely
dissatisfied with the Pope. The general fear which was
then in Germany of an Invasion by the Turks, and the
differences arisen betwixt Charles V. Francis I. and
Henry VIII. did greatly promote the Reformation,
since there was but little time for to think much of
these Disputes. some are of Opinion, that Charles V. 
did connive at the spreading of the Doctrine of Luther
throughout Germany, hoping by these Divisions to
get an opportunity to suppress the antient Liberty of
the Estates, and to make himself sovereign over Germany. 
For else (they say) he might easily have quenshed
the Fire at first, viz. in the year 1521. when he had
Luther in his power at Wormes, where he might have
secured him, which would have passed well enough for
a state Trick. But it is not so evident, whether, tho
Luther had been murthered against the Publick Faith
granted him, thereby his Doctrine would have been
rooted out; it is more probable that the Emperor, being
then but young, did not at that time foresee of what
Consequence this business might prove afterwards; and
that he did not think it advisable at that juncture of
time to break with the Elector of saxony, who was
then in great Authority. Neither could he pretend at
the same time, when he was engaged in a War against
France and the Turks, to attack the Princes of Germany
that were then courted by Francis, and who began to
make Alliances with them. Yet it is certain that under
the pretence of Religion he afterwards made War
upon the Protestant Estates of Germany, and intended

by their ruin to open himself the way to the Absolute
Monarchy over Germany. And tho he was very succesful
in the War against the League made at smalkald,
nevertheless he could not accomplish his projected design,
because he stood in need of the assistance of the
German Princes against France, and the Turks, and to
obtain the Imperial Crown for his son Philip. Nay
Paul III. himself dreaded the growing greatness of the
Emperor, to that degree that he stirred up the French to
oppose his prevailing Power, and to prevent the entire
ruine of the Protestants, allowed them to make use of
the Alliance with the Turks against the Emperor, who
he feared intended a thorough Reformation of the Court
of Rome. 
        And besides all this the ill Conduct of the Pope did
great mischief to the Roman Catholick Party. The ill Conduct of Leo and Cardinal Cajetan. 
          For it
was a grand mistake in Leo X. that he with so much violence
declared himself for these Merchants of Indulgences,
and by his Bull of the 9. of November in the
year 1518. decided the Points in Controversie betwixt
them, whereby he cut of all hopes and means for an
Accommodation. It would questionless have been better
for him to have stood Neuter, and to have imposed
silence upon both Parties, and in the mean while to have
found out an expedient to appease Luther. And Cardinal
Cajetan did in the year 1519. act a very imprudent
Part at Augsburgh, when he dealt so very rudely
with Luther, and refused to accept of his Proposal, viz. 
that he would be silent, provided his Adversaries would
do the same. For by this refusal made to so resolute a
Man, whom he would have obliged to make a Recantation,
he forced him to do his utmost, and to fall directly
upon the Pope himself. It would have been no
difficult matter to have granted him, that some corrupted
Manners were crept into the Church, to keep him from
meddling with the Reformation of the Doctrines. But
on the contrary, the Pope making continual instances at
the Elector of saxony's Court, to have Luther delivered
up to him, Luther was thereby obliged, to show the
unreasonableness of the Pope, and to demonstrate that
his own Doctrine was built upon a very solid and good
Foundation. And the Pope rendred his Cause very

suspicious, that he, when Luther appealed to a Council,
did by making a great many evasions protract to call
one: From hence it was evident that he did not trust
much to the goodness of his Cause, if it were to be debated
before impartial Judges. It was also an unlucky
hit for the Pope, when he fell out with Henry VIII. 
who to spite the Pope, did open the Door for the Protestant
Religion to be settled in England. Likewise did
those of the House of Navarre propagate and protect
the Protestant Religion in France, out of a hatred, as
some say, against the Pope, who had shown the way to
Ferdinand the Catholick into that Kingdom. Besides
this there were abundance of good Men of the Roman
Catholick Religion, who were glad to see that Luther
did wash the scabby Heads of the Monks with so
strong a Lye, as he did. so that every thing seemed
to concur to promote the Decree of God Almighty. §. Why the Doctrine of Luther was not spread farther. 27. But, why the Doctrine of Luther was not
spread farther, and the Ecclesiastical Monarchy was not
quite overturned, several Reasons may be alledged. 
First it is to be considered, that, in those states, where
Luther's Doctrine was received, the supreme Direction
in Ecclesiastical Affairs became necessarily to be devolved
on the Civil Magistrates. For if any one of
these states would have pretended to this Direction
over the others of the same Communion, these, who
would have thought themselves no less capable, would
never have acknowledged the same. Which did not a
little weaken their Union and strength, and was the
main occasion, that they could not act so unanimously
and vigorously against the Pope, as he against them. 
It is also to be considered, that this Reformation was
not undertaken after mature deliberation, and as it were
on purpose to form or set up a new state; but this great
Revolution happened upon a sudden and unexpectedly,
so that the whole Work was carried on as occasion
offered and by degrees. And tho Luther was the first,
that gave the Alarm, yet the rest did not think themselves
obliged to follow precisely his Opinion, but were
also ambitious of having contributed something towards
the Reformation. This occasioned Disputes among

themselves,Divisions among the Protestants. and because no body had an Authority among
them, to decide these Controversies, each Party
persisted obstinately in their Opinion; from whence
arose such a schism, that they became neglectful of
the Common Enemy, and fell upon one another. This
furnished the Popish Party with a very probable Argument,
who cried out aloud the Hereticks were faln into
Confusion among themselves, as not knowing what to
believe; and since they had left the Church of Rome,
they were brought into an endless Labyrinth. There
were also a great many of the Protestants, who under
pretext of the Gospel did lead an impious and scandalous
life,The Licenciousness of some Protestants. as if by the Liberty of the Gospel they had
obtained a License to abandon themselves to all sorts
of Vices. This gave also occasion to the Papists to
defame the Doctrine of Luther; especially since he had
with great severity reproved the licenciousness of the
Clergy, and had been generally applauded for it. It
also proved very mischievous to Luther's Doctrine, that
immediately after whole swarms of Fanaticks, Anabaptists
and the like appeared in the World, and that
the Boors in Germany run as it were mad, and made a
most dangerous Insurrection. When some Princes took
this Point into Consideration, the Doctrine of Luther
began to become suspicious to them, as if thereby the
licenciousness of the Common People was Taught and
Authorised; which they looking upon as a greater
Evil, than what oppression they were likely to suffer
from the Clergy, did with all their Power oppose the
Doctrine of Luther. 
        There are some who will have it,The University of Paris. 
          that the University
of Paris also had a share in this. For Luther having
persuaded himself, that this University was dissatisfied
at Leo X. because he had abolished the Pragmatick
sanction, concerning the Elections of Bishops; and
that therefore the Members thereof would be glad of an
opportunity to revenge themselves, he submitted his
Disputation with Eckius to their Judgment; but these
gave their Judgment against him, and that in very hard
words. The Kings of spain also did afterwards consider
that it was for their purpose to take upon them the
protection of the Roman Chair; wherefore they opposed

the Protestant Doctrine with all their might, and so
powerfully assisted the League in France, that Henry IV. 
if he would maintain his Crown, was obliged to leave
the Protestant Religion. some also have observed;Zwinglius and Calvin. that when Zwinglius, and
afterwards Calvin, began all upon a sudden to introduce
too great a Reformation, not only as to the inferiour
but also the Essential parts of the Church, and
thereby fell from one extreme to another: this proved a
main obstacle to the increase of the Protestant Religion. 
For Luther had hitherto made very little alteration
in outward Matters. He had left in the Churches
the Ornaments, Clocks, Organs, Candles, and such
like, he had retained the greatest part of the Mass,
but had added some Prayers in the Native Tongue
so that he was looked upon by most as a Reformer of
the Abuses only. But when it seemed that this Revolution
was likely to become Universal, Zwinglius appeared
in switzerland, as did Calvin afterwards in
France; these, instead of following the footsteps of Luther,
began to Preach against the Presence of the Body
of Christ in the sacrament of the Lord's supper, abolished
all sorts of Ceremonies and Ornaments, destroyed all
Reliques, broke the Altars and Images, abolished all
order of the Hierarchy, and despoiled Religion of all
such things as did most affect the Eyes and exteriour
senses of the People. This caused an aversion and
animosity in the Common People against them, and increased
its Zeal for that Religion, which it had received
from its Ancestors. The Riches of the Church did
partly promote Luther's Doctrine, a great many having
thereby taken an opportunity to possess themselves of
of these ample Revenues; nevertheless the same kept a
great many Prelates under the obedience of the Roman
Chair, who, if they had not been afraid of losing their
Rich Benefices, would not have been so backward to
side with Luther's Party. This was manifestly to be
seen in France, where both the Prelates and Common
People had made no great account of the Popes Authority
before the Reformation, but when they saw
that those of the Reformed Religion were for breaking
into their Quarters, they agreed better afterwards with

the Court of Rome, and the Commonalty was very
Zealous against the Reformed Religion. §. The Popish sovereignty recovered. 28. But besides this the Pope, as soon as his adherents
had recovered themselves from their first consternation,
and his Enemies were faln out among themselves,
has since settled his Affairs in such a manner, that the
Protestants in all likelyhood will not only not be able
to hurt him for the future, but he also by degrees gets
ground of them. For those things wherewith Luther
did upbraid them, and did the most mischief to them,
they have either quite abolished, or at least they are
transacted in a more decent manner; si non castè, tamen
cautè: They have also made use of the same Weapons,
wherewith Luther did attack them. For the
Popes now a days do not insult with so much haughtiness
over Princes, but treat them with more Civility
and Lenity. It is true, in the last Age Paul IV. behaved
himself very impudently towards spain, and in our
Age Paul V. did the same with Venice. But by the
mediation of wiser Heads, these Differences were
Composed, before they could draw after them any further
ill Consequences; and the Popes ever since have
been sufficiently convinced, that these hot-headed proceedings
are in no ways suitable to their present condition. 
For Paul V. did quickly give fair words, when
the French Ambassadour made him believe, that the
Venetians had sent for some Ministers from Geneva, to
be instructed in the Principles of the Reformed Religion. 
Neither have of late years sate such Debauchees
in the Papal Chair as Alexander VI. or such Martial
Popes as Julius II. was, but of late they have endeavoured
to carry on their Intreagues under hand,
whilst they in outward appearance pretend to be the
Promoters and Mediatours of Peace. That most
scandalous Trade of Indulgences, and that gross sort
of simony they have set aside, whilst they make it
their business to cajole the People out of their mony,
in a more handsome manner. The Bishops are now of another stamp,The Bishops, Priests, and Monks, more Regular and Learned than heretofore. and carry it
on with much more gravity than before the times of
Luther, nay, there are now among the Prelats eccellent

and well qualified Men. The Ordinary Priests and
Monks also have been much Reformed in their Manners,
and been obliged to lay aside their former brutish
Ignorance. Luther And his adherents did at first gain
mightily upon the People by their most excellent and
learned sermons, and by their Books which they published
thereby to excite the People to Piety, Prayers,
godly Meditations and Exercises. Both which the
Papists have imitated since, for among them now adays
are to be found most excellent Preachers, and very good
Prayer-Books; so that the Protestant Clergy has now
not much to object against them, as to their ability or
outward behaviour. They have also got a very good
insight into all the Controverted Points, and have a
dosen or more Distinctions at hand against any Objection. 
For example: whereas nothing seems more ridiculous,
than that the Pope should grant his Indulgences
for twenty or thirty thousands years to come, they
know how to give this a fine colour by these Distinctions
of Intensive and Extensive, Potentialiter and
Actualiter, which relish strangely with young students,
and the ignorant suppose them to be terms full of Mysteries. 
And because the Ignorance of the Clergy, and
the hatred conceived against Learning and learned Men,
had proved very prejudicial to the Popish Monarchy,
the Popish Clergy, and especially the Jesuits, have since
altered their Course, and having taken upon them the
Education of Youth, have pretended to the Monopoly
of Learning among the Roman Catholicks; so that
since that time Learning has not only not been prejudicial
but very profitable to them. Lastly,How they make Converts. they now adays do not make use of Fire and
sword to propagate the Roman Catholick Religion, but
the chief Men among the Protestants are inticed to
come over to their Party with fair Words, great Promises,
and actual Recompenses. If any one who is
well qualified will go over to their Party he may be
sure to make his Fortune, since the Wealth of their
Church furnishes them with sufficient Means to maintain
such a Person, tho his Merits were not extraordinary. 
Whereas on the contrary, if any one goes over
from them to the Protestants Religion, and either has

not wherewithal to live, or else is endowed with extraordinary
qualifications, he must expect nothing but
want. The House of Austria most Zealous for Popery. Last of all, those of the House of Austria have
greatly promoted the Popish Interest, when they drove
the Protestants out of the Hereditary Countries in Germany,
out of the Kingdom of Bohemia and the Countries
belonging thereunto, and lately have done the
same to the Protestants in Hungary, except to a very
few; or else have forced them to profess themselves Roman
Catholicks. §. The Temporal state of the Pope. 29. From what has been said it may easily be understood,
in what manner this Ecclesiastical sovereignty
has extended her Power over the Western parts of
Christendom. But throughly to understand the whole
structure, and Composure of this Engine, and by what
means it is sustained, it will not be improper to consider
the Pope in two different ways; first as a Prince in
Italy, and secondly as the spiritual Monarch over the
Western Church. As to the first it is to be observed,
that the Pope may be reckoned a Potent Prince in Italy,
but is in no ways to be Compared with the other
Princes in Europe. 
         His Dominions. The Countries under his Jurisdiction
are the City of Rome, with her Territories situated on
both sides of the River Tyber; the Dukedom of Benevento
in the Kingdom of Naples, the Dukedoms of
spoleto, Ʋrbino and Ferrara, the Marquisate of Ancona,
several places in Tuscany, Romaniola or Flaminia, where
are situated Bologna and Ravenna. In France the Country
of Avignon belongs to him. Parma is a Fief of the
Church, which Paul III. granted to his son Lewis Farnese. 
But since that time a Constitution has been made,
that it shall not be in the power of any Pope to Alienate
any Fief, or to grant any of the Countries belonging
to the Church in Fief to any person whatsoever,
to prevent the ruin of the Ecclesiastick state, and,
that, in case the Revenues from abroad should fail, the
Pope nevertheless might not want means to maintain
himself and his Court. The Kingdom of Naples is also
a Fief of the Church, in acknowledgment of which the
King of spain every year presents the Pope with a white
Horse, and some thousands of Ducats. What other

Pretensions the Court of Rome makes are out of date. 
For the rest, these Countries are indifferently Populous
and Fertile, having several Cities of Note, out of which
the Pope receives a Revenue of two Millions per annum. 
And the Popes Ministers take effectual care, that their
subjects may not be overgrown in riches. Perhaps there might be a considerable number of
good soldiers maintained out of the Ecclesiastick Estate,His Forces. 
but his Military strength is scarce worth taking notice
of, since he makes use of quite other means to preserve
his state than other Princes do. He maintains about
twenty Gallies, which have their station at Civita Vecchia. 
The chief state maxim of the Pope, as a Temporal
Prince is, that Peace may be preserved in Italy,
and that Italy may remain in the same state, as it is now,
and especially, that there may not be introduced any
other sovereign Power, which might prove so formidable
as to domineer over the rest. He must take great care
that the Turks may not get footing in Italy, and in case
of an Invasion from the Turks, not only Italy would
be obliged to join against them, but also whole
Christendom must be called in to help to chase out
these Barbarians, since no Christian Prince would be
contented that this delicious Country should fall into
their hands. The Pope has nothing to fear more from the German
Empire,How he stands with relation to Germany, spain and France. 
          as long as it remains upon the same Foundation. 
But if it should fall under the Government of an
Absolute Monarch, it is likely he might attempt to renew
the Antient Pretensions. spain and France are the
two Kingdoms, which are most formidable to the Pope. 
Against them the Pope makes use of this Maxim, that
he either sets them together by the Ears, or at least keeps
up the Ballance betwixt them, that one may not become
quite Master of the other. I am apt to believe
that the Pope would be glad with all his heart, that
the spaniards were driven out of Italy, especially out
of the Kingdom of Naples. But it is scarce to be supposed,
that he should be able to do it by his own
strength, and to make use of the French in this case,
would be to fall out of the Frying-Pan into the Fire. 
Therefore all what the Pope can do, is, to take care,

that spain may not encroach upon others in Italy; and
there is no question but if the spaniards should attempt
any such thing, France and all the other Italian states
would be ready to oppose their design. Neither can it
be pleasing to the Pope, if the King of France should get
so much footing in Italy, as to be able to sway Matters
there according to his pleasure, which the Pope ought to
prevent with all his might. The Pope need not fear
much from the other states of Italy. For tho' some of
them are under hand his Enemies, and dread his spiritual
Power, some of them also have been chastised by
the Court of Rome, nevertheless, they must at least in
outward appearance pay to the Pope a due Veneration,
neither dare they as much as devise to make any Conquests
upon the Pope. Notwithstanding this, they would
not look with a good Eye upon the Pope, if he should pretend
to make any Conquests upon his Neighbours and
enlarge his Dominions; this refined Nation being extreamly
jealous, and desirous to keep up the ballance betwixt
the states of Italy. 
        § 30. Particular Constitution of the Popish Monarchy as spiritual. But if we consider the Pope, secondly, as the
spiritual Monarch of Christendom and the Vicar of
Jesus Christ upon Earth, we meet in this spiritual state
with such surprising and subtile pieces, that it must be
confessed, that since the beginning of the World, there
has not been set up a more artificial Fabrick than the
Popish Monarchy. It has required the more sagacity to
erect and sustain this structure, the more the ends of
this sovereignty are quite different from the ends of all
other states in the World, and the more feeble the Title
appears upon which it is founded. For it is the main
end of other Commonwealths, to live in security and
Peace; for the maintaining of which, the subjects contribute
a share out of their Goods and Possessions; nay,
venture their lives that they may sufficiently provide
against the attempts of malicious People, and live in security
and without danger from their Enemies. And besides
this, it is the Duty of every subject to take care
that he may be able to maintain himself out of his own
Revenues, or by his Labour and Industry. But the Popish
Monarch's chief design is, that the Popes and the

Clergy may live in Plenty and splendour in this World,
all which is to be maintained at the Cost and Charge
of other People, who must be perswaded to part
with their Money by several shining Arguments and artificial
Persuasions. And whereas other states are fain
to maintain their Forces and Garrisons with great Expences,
the Pope on the contrary entertains his Militia
without any Charge, but rather with Profit to himself. 
And whereas it is also a state Maxim among the wiser
Princes, not to extend their Conquests too far, the Pope
has no occasion to imitate them in this point, since it is
neither dangerous nor troublesome to him, tho' he extends
his Jurisdiction over the East and West Indies. 
The Rights of sovereignty are founded upon evident
and undeniable Principles and divine Institution, since
without it, it is impossible that mankind should live honestly,
securely, commodiously and decently. But to
find out the same necessity and foundation of the Pope's
sovereign Authority, and to demonstrate that as the
Peace and Welfare of Mankind, cannot subsist without
a supreme Civil Power; so the Christian World cannot
be without a supreme Ecclesiastical Power, is in my
mind impossible to be done. He that is unwilling to believe
this, let him find out a demonstrative proof and
he will be the miracle of the World. But if the Pope's
Champions pretend to a positive Command from God
Almighty, they are obliged to prove by clear and evident
proofs, and that in all its clauses and determinations
out of the Holy scripture; that our saviour when
he sent his Disciples all over the World to preach the
Christian Faith, did give them full Power, not only to
propagate the Christian Doctrine among all Nations,
and not to be dependent on any humane Power in their
Office, so as thereby to be hindered from preaching
or forced to add or retrench any thing from their Doctrine
(which Power is unquestionable:) But also that
they had a Power granted them, to put into the Ministry
of the Gospel, and that without the Consent of the
Magistrates (tho' the same professed the true Christian
Religion) as many and whom they pleased; that they
also might grant to these again full Power to increase
their Order to such a number as they should think fit

themselves, without having any regard to the Civil
Power or Magistrates, whose Right and Title is thereby
empaired. And because they cannot live upon the
Air, they must also have a Power granted them to seek
out all ways and means not only for their subsistance,
but also for carrying on their pride and extravagancies. 
They must also have a prerogative granted them of being
exempted from the Civil Jurisdiction both in their
persons and such possessions as they have acquired to
themselves, tho' the same appertain to the Revenues of
the Commonwealth, are situated in the Territories, and
enjoy the protection of the sovereign, who is to have no
power to lay Taxes upon them, to prescribe them limits
or imploy them to any other uses. They must
also prove that the supreme Direction over this Order as
well concerning their Office as their Possessions does belong
to one of the same Order on whom the rest depend
as their sovereign, and that the Civil Magistrates cannot
pretend to any superiour Jurisdiction over them, tho'
the Ecclesiastical Order either by its number or misbehaviour
should prove pernicious to the state, and tho'
the state could not be maintained without the Revenues
of the Ecclesiasticks, which must not be imployed
for the benefit of the publick without the Consent of
him who has the supreme Direction over this Order. 
Besides this, they are obliged also to prove some other
Hypotheses of theirs, which are Matter of Fact. As for
example, that our saviour Christ did grant the spiritual
sovereignty over the Church to st. Peter only, without
allowing the least share to the rest of the Apostles. 
That he did grant this Prerogative, not only to st. Peter
for his own person, but also that the same should be a
perpetual Inheritance to such as should succeed him in
that place where he resided as Bishop. Besides this, they
must prove that st. Peter was actually Bishop of Rome,
that he exercised the same Power there, and granted the
said Prerogative to no other place where he used to
preach besides Rome. And because these Points are so
very hard to be proved, the Popish Doctors are obliged
to be very cautious in proposing these Questions distinctly
to the World, but rather treat of the same confusedly
and superficialy. It is rather their business to fill

the Peoples Heads with far-fetched Arguments which do
not so nearly touch the point, viz. concerning the great
Promises, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against
the Church, concerning the great Authority and Prosperity
of the Church, her Antiquity, the succession of the
Popes, the Holy Fathers and Councils, the Authority of
so many Ages and Nations, Miracles and such like stuff,
fit for a Declamation. They also make use of another
expedient, viz. that if any one dares to contradict these
things, he is immediately without hearing his reasons,
branded with the Name of a Heretick, and esteemed
as one that being a novice and ignorant in his Trade,
ought not to be so bold as to contradict his Master, but
deserves to be burnt. § 31. Why the Popish sovereignty was to be exercised in the Form of a Monarchy. It is easily to be imagined, that this spiritual sovereignty
was of necessity to be established in the form
of a Monarchy, since it was in no ways suitable to a
Democratical or Aristocratical Government, not only by
reason of several inconveniencies which would have attended
it, but more especially, because that so many different
Heads as sway a Democratical and Aristocratical
Government, would even by the most severe Laws never
have been kept in such a Union, but that by raising
of Factions and Dissensions they would have easily
overturned a Work which was built upon so slight a
Foundation. But among the several sorts of Monarchical
Governments, they have chosen such a one as that
by all the Art of Men, there could not have been invented
one more suitable to their purpose; it being most
certain that all the speculative Inventions of the most
refined Politicians, are not in the least to be compared to
what may be met wital in this Popish Monarchy. 'Tis
true, some Princes have gained to themselves and their
Government a great Authority, by pretending to be the
Off-spring of the Gods, and that they had laid the Foundation
of their Government by the express Command
of the Gods and by their peculiar Approbation; wherefore
they used to be after their death placed in the number
of the Gods, and were adored as such. But the
Pope has gone farther, and perswaded the People that
he is the Lieutenant of Jesus Christ, who has all Power

in Heaven and Earth, and his Vicar in the World, and
that in a more exalted sense than it is spoken of the
Magistrates, that they are Ministers of God's Justice upon
Earth. For he pretends that he has the Power of
dispensing the Merits of Jesus Christ, and that such as
refuse to acknowledge this Prerogative, are not capable
of obtaining salvation. And since there is nothing more
powerful in this World to induce People to a profound
Veneration than the Divine Majesty, and no motive
more strong to enforce from them an obedience and an
entire submission to all sorts of hardship than the fear
of God's wrath and eternal damnation; it is evident that
if this Point is once gained and the People thoroughly
perswaded, there needs no further proof of the rest of
their Articles of Faith, than that 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, the Pope has
determined it so. Besides this,Way it must be an elective Monarchy. most Nations having esteemed an hereditary
Government the most convenient and least dangerous,
have introduced that form into their states; but
this form of Government could not suite with the intention
of this spiritual Monarchy. For in these states
where the Crown is hereditary, it must of necessity sometimes
happen, that the same is devolved to Princes who
are Minors; and it would be an odd sight, that a
Child that rides the Hobby-horse, should be taken for
the Vicar of Christ, and that the Protectour of Christendom
shoul want a Tutor. Neither is it to be supposed
that young Princes could behave themselves so
gravely and wisely, as seems to be requisite for a Person
of his station; neither can it as much as be hoped, that
a whole succession of Princes should be inclinable to such
a Function. In a word, an hereditary succession would
have made it the same with a temporal state, which
could never have been maintained long upon so awkward
and slight a Foundation. For the great Ministers
themselves would have been for putting by the
Pope, that they might succeed in his stead; whereas
these seeing they cannot possess themselves of the Papacy
by open force are now very obedient, in hopes that
either they themselves or at least their Friends may one
time or another attain to this Dignity by Election. 
Besides this, it might easily have happened, that in case

the Royal Family should have been extinguished, such
Dissensions might have arisen concerning the succession,
that the whole Frame of the state would thereby have
been disjointed. It was also thought convenient this spiritual sovereign
should be obliged never to marry,Why the Pope was to live in a state of Celibacy. which seemed
most suitable to the gravity of this Court, since a great
train of Ladies living in great splendour and plenty
would have made such a figure, as must needs appear
but little suitable to excite others to a Holy Life and
Devotion. Wherefore it was the main design, by a
fained hypocrisy to impose a belief upon the People, as
if the Court of Rome was so wholly taken up with spiritual
Affairs, that there was no room left for worldly
Pleasures. It was also reasonably supposed, that a Prince
who had Wife and Children might sometimes be led
away to take more to heart the private Interest of his
Family than the publick Good of the state, since there
can scarce be any thing more prevailing upon a Man,
than the consideration of the welfare, and preservation
of Wife and Children. And what Alexander VI. and
Paul III. did with their Bastards, have been convincing
Instances of this position to the Court of Rome. It is possible
that they also rook this into consideration, that if a
Temporal foreign Prince should obtain this Dignity, he
would entail it upon his House, which inconveniencies
are now avoided by the Obligation which is laid upon
the Pope never to marry. The Conclave is also a most admirable Invention to
bridle the immoderate Ambition,The Conclave. and prevent those
schisms, which used formerly miserably to afflict the
see and weaken the Authority of the Popes; besides
that, thereby a long Vacancy of the Chair is prevented,
and by means of this Election, it is much easier to pick
out one that is fitly qualified to represent the great and
artificial Hypocrite, and afterwards to make the People
believe, that are ignorant of the Intrigues of the Conclave,
that it was by the particular providence of God
Almighty, that such a Person was chosen as was the
most worthy to be God's Vicar upon Earth. Thus
much at least may be obtained by an Election, that such
a Person is chosen as is well versed in the Arts of Policy

and their ambitious Designs, and whose Age being
above the folly and extravagancies of young Men, may
by his years and long experience appear more venerable
in his Function. What Qualifications are necessary for one that is to be chosen Pope. It is also a very wise Ordinance
concerning the Election of a Pope, that he is to have
two third parts of the Votes in the Conclave, which
seems to have been introduced, that the new Pope might
not be displeasing to a great number of Cardinals. Now
a days it is a general maxim in the choice of a Pope,
to elect an Italian, which is not only done because they
rather will bestow this Dignity and Advantage upon a
Native of Italy than upon a Foreigner, but also because
the security and preservation of the Papal Chair depends
in a great measure on the ballance which is to be kept
betwixt France and spain, which is not to be expected
from a French of spanish Pope, who would quickly turn
the scale, and by granting too great Prerogatives to his
Country-men, endeavour to exclude others from the
Papal Chair. They also choose commonly a Pope who
is pretty well in years, but very seldom a young one,
that also others may be in hopes of attaining the same
Dignity, and that a young Pope during a long Regency
may not undertake to alter their Customs
and Maxims, or to make his Family so Rich and
Potent and set up so many Creatures of his own, as
thereby to entail the Papal Chair upon his House. Besides
that, in this station where the Pope need not to
go into the Field, there is more occasion for a grave
antient Man than a vigorous young Person. It is also
another Maxim among them, to take care that he may
not be too near a Kin to the deceased Pope, that the
vacant Church-Benefices may not fall into the Hands
of one Family, and the new Pope may be the sooner
prevailed upon to amend the Faults of his Predecessor. 
Lastly, They are commonly for choosing such a one as is
neither too much addicted to the spanish nor the French
Interest, yet that he be not hated by either of these
two parties. Wherefore it is a Custom among them,
that both these Crowns give in a List of such Cardinals
as they would have excluded from being elected
Pope. Notwithstanding all this it often so happens,
that one is chosen Pope of whom no body thought before,

when the Cardinals are tired out by so many Intrigues,
and are glad to get out of the Conclave. It is also
often observed, that a Pope proves quite another Man
after he is come to sit in the Chair than he was before,
when yet a Cardinal. The Pope at his entring upon the
Government, is not tied to any certain Rules or Capitulations,
since it would seem very unbecoming to controul by
humane Laws and Contracts the Power of him who is
pretended to be endowed with the Holy Ghost. But the College of the Cardinals is as it were the standing
Council of the Ecclesiastical state,College of the Cardinals. in like manner as
the Chapters of the Cathedrals are to the Bishops in Germany. 
With those the Pope advises concerning Matters
of the greatest moment; nevertheless it often happens
that the Popes and their Nephews make but little account
of their Advice, but act as they please. The
chief Prerogative of the Cardinals consists chiefly in that
they have the Power of choosing a Pope, and that out
of their own Body, they being supposed to be the next
to him, and best acquainted with the Affairs of the
Court of Rome, which is one necessary qualification of a
Pope. Their ordinary number is Threescore and Ten,
which is seldom complete. They now a-days are treated
by the Title of your Eminency, according to a Decree of
Pope Ʋrban VIII. whereas they were formerly called Most
Illustrious (Illustrissimi) which Title was grown very common
in Italy. And because the Cardinals had got a new
Title, the Princes of Italy pretended also to be treated by
the Title of your Highness (Altazza) whereas formerly
they were very well satisfied with the Title of your Excellency
(Excellenza. ) The Election of the Cardinals
depends absolutely on the Pope's pleasure, who nevertheless,
constantly takes notice of such as are recommended
to that Dignity by France, spain and other Princes. 
The Parasites of the Court of Rome, are not ashamed to
maintain, that the Cardinal's Cap is equal in Dignity
to a Crowned Head, and to this day they pretend to
have the precedency before the Electors of the Empire. Ever since the time of Pope sixtus IV. The Popes enrich th•ir Kindred. 
         viz. since the
Year 1471. the Popes have made it their Business to enrich
their Families out of the Church Revenues, of
which there are very remarkable Instances. For it is

related that sixtus V. during his Regency of five Years,
did bestow upon his Family above three Millions of
Ducats; and Gregory XV. had in two Years and three
Months, got together the value of three Millions in
Lands, without reckoning what he left in ready
Money. It is reported of the House of the Barbarini's,
that at the death of Ʋrban VIII. they were possessed
of 227 Offices and Church-Benefices, most of them
reckoned at three, five, eight and ten Thousand seudi a
piece, whereby it is said, they got together a Treasure
of 30 Millions of scudi. This has been represented
as a very scandalous thing by some, but if duly
considered, it is a great folly to suppose, that since the
main intention of the Popish sovereignty is to enrich the
Clergy, the Popes should stifle their natural inclination
toward their Kindred, and not make Hay whilst the
sun shines. This is rather to be looked upon as a common
Infirmity, that Favourites and others whilst they
are Fortunate are envied by others, who are vexed because
Fortune is not so favourable to them. Besides
that, the Revenues of the Church are so great, that the
Popes since they need not entertain any considerable
Army, scarce know how to employ them better. since the time of Pope Ʋrban VIII. a Custom has
been introduced, to make one of the Pope's Nephews
Chief Minister of the Ecclesiastical state, whom they
call Cardinal Patroon (Cardinal Patrono. ) Among other
Reasons,Cardinal Patroon. why the Pope commits the management
of Affairs to one of his Nephews, this is alledged for
one; that by reason of the nearness of Blood, he ought
to be preferred before others, and that by so doing,
the Pope's Person is better secured against any attempts
which are sooner made upon his Life than of other hereditary
Princes, whose death their successours are able
to revenge. How fearful the Popes are of Poyson, may
be judged from thence, that as often as the Pope receives
the sacrament, his Chaplain who is to administer the
Bread and Wine, is obliged to taste of both before the
the Pope. It is also pretended, that by the Ministry of
the Nephews, this Advantage is obtained, that the other
Ministers and Governours have not so much opportunity
to enrich themselves, and to put one another

out of place, which is the common Custom in Elective
states. For their Nephews are few in number, and
therefore sooner to be satisfied; neither will they easily
suffer that others should enrich themselves, since they are
sensible that all the hatred falls upon themselves. They
are also very serviceable to the Pope, in that they more
freely can disclose the Interests of the several Princes to
him, than other Ministers who are not so nearly allied to
him, and that they are fain to be more circumspect
in their management of Affairs, for fear, left they may
one time or another be called to an account; for which
reason it is their Business, so to oblige one Prince or another,
that they may upon all occasions be sure of his
Protection. Besides, that by their Assistance, Affairs
may be carried on with much more secrecy than otherwise. 
And if the Pope were destitute of their Counsel,
he would be obliged to have recourse to the Cardinals,
who most commonly are very partial, being most of
them engaged to foreign Princes either by Pensions or
Benefices. § 32. Concerning the Celibacy of the Popish Clergy. The subjects of this Ecclesiastical Monarchy
may commodiously be divided into two several sorts; the
first comprehends the whole Clergy, the second all the
rest of Christendom, as far as the same professes the Roman
Catholick Religion, which is commonly called
the Laiety. The first may be compared to the standing
Army of a Prince, who thereby manitains his Conquests;
the rest are to be deemed as subjects that are
Tributaries to the Prince, and are obliged to maintain
those standing Forces at their Charge. The first have
this particular Obligation upon them, that they must
abstain from Marriage. This is done under pretence
of a special Holiness, and that thereby they may be the
more fit to perform their Duty without any hinderance;
but the true reason is, that they should not prefer the
Interest and Welfare of their Wife and Children, before
that of the Church, and in consideration thereof, not
side with those Princes under whose Jurisdiction they
live, or that they should not enrich their Children with
the Revenues of the Church, but be the more ready upon
all occasions to execu•e the Pope's Will, especially

against such Princes, under whose Protection they live. 
For since Wife and Children are esteemed the dearest
Pledges, not to be left to the discretion of an enraged
Enemy, they could the easier despise the anger of their
Princes, if they had no other Care to take but for themselves,
a single Man not needing to fear a livelihood in
any place whatever. And it has been the main endeavours
of the Popes to exempt the Clergy by all means
from the Jurisdiction of the Civil Magistrates, and to
make them only dependent on himself. Besides this,
the avaricious Clergy would not have made so good a
Harvest if it had been taken for granted among the
People, that the same was collected for their Wife and
Children, whereas now it is pretended, that they receive
not for themselves, but for the maintainance of the
Church. But those who have been so busie to force
Celibacy upon the Clergy, were forgetful in not prescribing
them at the same time a Recipe against Incontinency,
and which they seem to stand in great need of. 
How vast a number there is of this sort of People,Their Number. may
be best judged out of what is related of Pope Paul IV. 
who used to brag, that he had 228000 Parishes, and
44000 Monasteries under his Jurisdiction, if he did not
mistake in his account, especially as to the Monasteries,
The Clergy may again be subdivided into two sorts, viz. 
those who are bare Priests and Ecclesiasticks, and those
who have engaged themselves by a particular Vow, viz. 
the Monks and Jesuits who are to be esteemed the Pope's
pretorian Bands. They receive for their pay Honours
and Dignities, great Revenues, a quiet Life, without
any great Labour, and live always near a good Kitchin;
but those who have addicted themselves to a
more strict Order, are fed with the vain belief of Holiness,
great Merits and particular Prerogatives above others. § 33. The Popish Doctrine suted to the s••e. The Pope makes use of this Artifice to keep the
Laiety in Obedience, that he persuades them to receive
and consider his Ecclesiastical Troops, as the Chief
Promoters of their salvation, and Masters over their
Consciences; which serves like a Bridle to lead and
turn them about according to the Will of the Clergy. 

And that every thing may be accommodated to the Interest
of this spiritual Monarchy, several Articles of the
Christian Religion have been by degrees stretched or
patched up with new Additions; and any one that will
duly weigh these Matters wherein they differ with their
Adversaries, will soon find that in those points there is generally
a mixture of Interest as to the Authority, Power
and Revenues of the Clergy. Among those in the first
place is to be reckoned the Doctrine concerning the
Authority and Power of the Pope, whereby they pretend
to set him above Councils, and make him Infallible;
which point is stretched to the utmost by the
Jesuits, because, if that stands fast, all the rest is soon
proved. As that of the Pop••s Power. Wherefore, what has been taught formerly,
and if I am not mistaken, is taught even to this Day, by
the Doctors of the sorbon, viz. that the Councils are
equal to, or rather above the Pope, is destructive to the
very fundamental Constitution of the Popish Monarchy,
since this Doctrine smells strongly of a Democracy,
which is directly contrary to a Monarchy. And it is not
easily to be reconciled how the Pope who pretends to
have such great Prerogatives above all others, should be
subject to the Censure of his Cretures and Vassals. 
For as they will have it, whatsoever either the Holy
scripture, or the antient Fathers have attributed to the
Church, ought altogether to be applied to the Pope, in
like manner, as what is spoken of a whole Kingdom, is
commonly to be understood of the King. The Laiety has been debarred from reading the Holy
scripture,The prohibition of the Laietya reading the scripturea. by which means not only the Authority of
the Clergy is maintained among the People, as if the
Priests were the only Men that have a privilege to approach
to the Divine Oracles; but also the Laiety is
thereby prevented from finding out those points in the
scripture which are repugnant to the Interest of the
Clergy: For if the People should once get a true Understanding
of the scripture, they would not be so forward
to follow so blindly the Instructions of the Priests. 
They also by this means prevent the Laiety from diving
too deeply into Divinity, which they pretend belongs
only to the Clergy; and for this reason it is that they
attribute the Power of explaining the scripture to the

Pope only, that nothing may be brought to light, which
may in any ways be prejudicial to the spiritual Monarchy. 
For the same reason the Pope pretends to
have the sole Authority of deciding all Controversies
whatsoever. It is also given out among the People,Traditions. that the Holy
scripture is imperfect, which must be explained by antient
Traditions; whereby they gain this point▪ that if
they invent any Doctrine for the Interest of the spiritual
state, whereof there is not the least footsteps to be
found in the Holy scripture, they without any other
proof, may only have recourse to the antient Traditions. The distinction betwixt Venial and Mortal sins,Venial and Mortal sins. as
also what is alledged de casibus reservatis, is barely invented
for the benefit of the Clergy. That infinite number
of Books of Confession, enough to fraight whole
Fleets withal, is not published with an intention to correct
Vices, but that by laying a Tax upon the same,
the Clergy may the better be able to maintain their
Grandeur, and satisfie their Avarice. The most comfortable
Doctrine of remission of sins, has wholly been
accommodated to the Interest of the Clergy. Penance▪
          For, because
it would not have turned to the profit of the
Clergy, if every one who truly repented should obtain remission
of his sins, only by Faith in the Merits of Christ;
it has been the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, that
it was an essential piece of penitence, and the means to
obtain forgiveness of sins, if a most exact and precise
account of every individual sin committed was given
to the Priest. By which means, they not only keep the
People under their Devotion, and make such impressions
upon them as are fitting for their purpose; but
they also come thereby to the knowledge of all secrets,
Counsels, Designs and Inclinations of the People, which
they make good use of for their benefit; notwithstanding,
that they are under an obligation not to reveal
any thing that is told them by way of Confession;
for, else it would be impossible for them to persuade
the People to act against the natural Inclination of all
Mankind. The Priest has also a Power to command
works of satisfaction to be done, whereby he commonly

has his good share. For tho' certain Prayers, Pilgrimages,
Fasts, Flagellations and the like, are often imposed
upon them for Penances, yet they also very often
condemn some, and especially the richer sort in a good
sum of Money, to be given instead of a Penance to a
certain Monastery, Church or the Poor, among whom
are the Mendicant-Fryars. These honest Fellows call
themselves minimos fratrum, according to the 25. Chap. 
of st. Matthew, that they may have a fair shining pretence
to fill their Purses. For by this Interpretation, the
Christains have got this benefit, that they are obliged
to feed and maintain 100000 lazy, idle Fellows. Besides
this, the first sort of Penance may be redeemed
with Money, if you think it too hard to be performed. 
And who that is wealthy, would not be civil and liberal
towards his Father-Confessour, to oblige him to a
mitigation of the Penance or because he has already
shewed himself favourable before?Why good Works have been made meritorious and
the means of obtaining salvation from God Almighty,Merit of good Works. is
easily to be guessed. For when they were to give a definition
of good Works, they were sure to put in the
first place, that the Pople ought to be liberal towards
the Clergy, Churches and Monasteries, and to perform
every thing which is commanded them by the Pope and
his adherents, tho' never so full of superstition and Hypocrisy. 
Neither must this be forgot, that they also
have taught, that the Monks are not only able to perform
good Works sufficient for themselves, but that also
they have an overplus of Merits which they can fell to
the Laiety. And out of this overplus, they have laid
up an inexhaustible store very profitable to the Clergy,
which costs them nothing, which does not grow musty
nor ever decays, and which cannot be returned upon
their hands, when the Buyer finds out the Cheat. Their Religious Exercises are so full of Ceremonies,Ceremonies,
so many superfluous Feasts and Processions are instituted
so many Chapels are Altars erected only to employ so
great a number of Clergymen, who else would appear
like so many idle Fellows, whereas now it turns all to
their profit; which is also the reason why they have encreased
the number of sacraments of seven, since they

know that none of them can be administred, but the
Priest gets by it. The Mass without Communicants
has been introduced and proclaimed a sacrifice both for
the dead and the living, that they might have an opportunity
to put both the dead and the living under Contribution. 
For no body undertakes any thing of moment,
but he has a Mass sung first, for the good success
of the thing in hand. No body of wealth dyes, but he
orders a good store of Masses to be sung for his soul, all
which brings grist to the Priest's Mill. On the other hand,Half Communion. after it once was become an abuse,
that the Laiety did receive the sacrament without
partaking of the Cup, it was made into a Law. 
And tho' the contrary was very evident both by the Institution
of Christ, and the practice of the Church for
a great many Centuries, yet did they persist with great
obstinacy, because it should not seem that the Clergy had
committed an Errour; and also that they might have a
Prerogative before the Laiety in this sacrament. And
to ridicule the more impudently both God and Men,
they give to the Laiety a Chalice which is not consecrated,
which in very despicable Terms they call the rinsing
Chalices, as People when they have eaten any uncleanly
thing, use to rinse their Mouths. Marriage also was to be made a sacrament,Marriage made a sacrament. tho' nothing
is more absurd, that the Clergy might have an
opportunity to draw all matrimonial Causes under their
Jurisdiction, which are often very profitable, very various
and of the greatest Consequence, since the welfare,
inheritance and succession of most People, nay,
even of whole Kingdoms depend thereon. This obliged
Mary Queen of England to endeavour the re-establishment
of Popery in that Kingdom; for without the
Pope's Authority, she must have passed for a Bastard. 
And Philip III. King of spain was among other reasons
obliged to the Pope, because he had given Dispensation
to his Father to marry his own sister's Daughter, of
whom Philip was born, which Marriage would not
easily have been approved by other Christians. There
were also so many prohibited degrees introduced on
purpose that the Clergy might have frequent opportunities
to give Dispensations, whereby they know how

to feather their Nest. Extreme Unction. By the Extreme Ointment the
Priest takes an occasion to exhort the dying people to
leave Legacies for pious uses, which they commonly
know how to apply to the advantage of their own
Order. Purgatory. Purgatory was invented for no other purpose,
but that the dying Man, who at that time is not so
greedy of worldly Goods, which he is to leave to others,
might be liberal towards the Clergymen, in hopes,
by their intercession and a good number of Masses to
get the sooner out of this hot place. The Veneration
paid to the Reliques,Reliques▪ Prayers to saints. has also been very beneficial to
the Clergy; these are employed, besides other uses, to
reward people of Quality, that have done great services to
the Pope, with a piece of an old Bone in lieu of a better
present. The Adoration of the saints serves for a pretext
to build the more Churches, institute more Feasts
and employ and feed a greater number of Priests. The
power, which the Pope has assumed of Canonization,
gives him a considerable authority among the People, as
if it were his prerogative to bestow Dignities and Offices
upon whom he thinks fit, even in Heaven, and that
God Almighty cannot but accept of such Referendaries,
as the Pope is pleased to represent to him. By this
means he makes himself Master of the Inclinations of
the People though living in far distant places, unto
whom he proposes this as a Recompense of their
Credulity and Ambition, if they stick at nothing
to promote his Interest. And ever since this superstition
has taken root in Christendom, those who
have been Canonized have for the most part been
Clergymen, who either by a new invented Hypocrisie,
or outward appearance of Holiness had made
themselves famous in the World. Or if by chance one
Layman or another has attained to this Dignity, either
he himself, or at least those that interceeded for him,
have been fain to deserve very well of the Papal Chair. 
Not to mention here, in what manner they by fictitious
Miracles, several sorts of Images, Apparitions, Exorcisms,
Indulgences, Jubilees, prohibition of divers
sorts of Victuals, and such like tricks used to fool the
People out of their mony. 
§. The Universities have promoted the Popish sovereignty. 34. Next to what has been said, the Universities,
which have partly been Instituted by the Popes Authority,
partly by other states, yet so that most of them
have been Confirmed by the Popes, who also have
claimed the supreme Direction over the some, have
been mainly instrumental in maintaining the Popish sovereignty. 
It is evident enough of what Consequence
this Direction must needs be to the Pope. For, since
in the Universities Men are first imbued with such
Opinions, as they afterwards are to make use of
during their whole Life, and instil them into others,
the Universities, and sciences there to be taught
were to be sure to be accommodated to the Popes
Interest. Neither were the Professours of Divinity
here, who claimed the Precedency before all others,
the only Creatures of the Pope, but also the Professours
of the Canon Law, who were as busie as any to put
his Decrees upon the World, and to maintain his Authority. 
For the World may thank the Canon-Law
for the first Introduction of those long Law suits, which
the Clergy pretended to belong to their Jurisdiction, that
by receiving of Bribes they might the sooner satisfie
their Avarice. The greatest-part of the Philosophers
were also the Popes slaves, and if one or another attempted
to investigate the true causes of Things, he
was sure to be kept under by all the rest. The Divinity
and Philosophy which was professed in these Universities
were not taught with an intention to make
the young students more learned and understanding,
but that the ingenious by these confused and idle terms
might be diverted from throughly investigating those
matters which would have led them to the whole discovery
of the Popish Intreagues. For their scholastick
Divinity is not employed in searching and explaining
the Holy scripture, but for the most part entangled in
useless questions, invented chiefly by Peter Lombard,
Thomas Aquinas, scotus, and the other Patriarchs of
Pedantry. And what they call Philosophy is nothing
else but a Collection of foolish Chimer's, empty Terms,
and very bad Latin, the knowledge of which is rather
hurtful than profitable, if you have not been better Instructed

otherwise. so that all what they pretended
to, was to take care that the sciences might not be
fundamentally taught to the students. With these
Trumperies the Universities were not only over-run
during the former barbarous times, but even continue
to this very day; and tho most sciences are so much
improved, the old Leaven is with great Industry preserved
and propagated: on the contrary all the solid
science, especially such, as are Instrumental in discovering
the Vulgar Errors of the World are suppressed. 
Above all the rest, the most useful of all, Doctrine
of Morality is much misinterpreted and entangled in
an endless Labyrinth, that the Fathers Confessours may
not want means to domineer over the Laymens Consciences,
and to entangle them with so many dubious and
double meaning insinuations, that they are thereby rendred
incapable to examin and rule their Actions, according
to solid Principles, but are obliged to be
guided blindfold according to the pleasure of their
Fathers Confessours. §. Why the Jesuits have taken upon them the Education of the Youth. 35. But, because Learning had given the main
blow to the Pope, at the time of Luther's Reformation,
the Jesuits, who may well be called the Popes Guard
du Corps, have afterwards taken upon them the management
of the Youth; for they not only teach publickly
in the Universities, but they have also engrossed to themselves
the Instruction of the Youth in the schools, that
they might have all the opportunity so to guide and direct
them in their studies, that they might not only not
prove prejudicial, but rather advantageous to the Kingdom
of Darkness. For by this way of managing the
Youth they have not only acquired vast Riches and Authority
to their Order, but also have been very instrumental
in maintaing the Popish Monarchy, which they
are bound to do by a particlar Vow above all the other
Monks. They make it their business to imprint into the
tender minds of the Youth a Veneration for the Pope,
and so to guide their inclinations as they think it
most profitable to the state of the Church. They use
the young people from their infancy to persist obstinately
in their conceived Opinions, and that no Reasons

ought to prevail against them, whereby they render them
incapable of ever attaining the knowledge of Truth. 
They have also an opportunity throughly to investigate
and discover the Capacities and Inclinations of their
Disciples, which they make good use of to their advantage,
whenever these are imployed in state Affairs. 
But such as they find of an extraordinary Capacity or
abounding in Wealth, they endeavour by all means to
draw into their Order. so that the main intention of
their school Discipline which is so famous throughout
the World, is, to uphold the Pope's sovereignty. They
boast of extraordinary methods to teach the Latin
Tongue to young people, but they take a particular
care, that they do not let their Disciples grow too wise,
except such as are to be received into their Order. And,
because, they have by this management of the Youths
brought a great many able Men over to their Order,
and are besides this very gentile and civil in their Conversation
(in which point they are far above all the other
Monks, who are most of them full of Incivility and
Pedantry) they have found means, under pretence of
being Confessours, to creep into most Courts, and
to insinuate themselves into the very secrets of the
state; so that in a great many Courts they have the
greatest sway in the Councils; And there you may be
sure they will never be forgetful of the Popes and their
own Interest. Nevertheless by their insatiable Avarice,
and forwardness of medling in all Affairs they have made
themselves odious in some places; And because the
Jesuits have trespassed upon the Authority and advantages
of the other Monks, who are of more antient
Orders, these are grown jealous of them to the highest
degree. Neither ought it to be passed by in silence,Licensing of Books. that the
Pope and his adherents pretend to have a right of Censuring
and Licensing all Books whatsoever, whereby
they may easily prevent that nothing may come to light,
which might prove prejudicial to them. And in Censuring
of Books they are so impudent as not only to
strike out of the antient Authors, when the same are
to be reprinted, at pleasure, such passages as they dislike,
but also they do not stick to insert such new passages

as are suitable to their intentions. If any Book is to be
published in their Territories first the same is exactly revised
and corrected. And if it should happen by chance,
that something should be overseen in the first Edition
which does not suit with their Interest, it is marked in
an Index made for that purpose, that it may be omitted
in the next Edition. But the Books of their Adversaries
are prohibited, nay the reading of them is not allowed,
but to some particular persons, and that not
without special leave, and these are such as they know
to be thorough-paced and intirely devoted to their Interest. 
By so doing they may lay to their Adversaries
charge what they please, since their subjects never get
sight of the others Refutation. It has been a general
observation, that since the scandalous life of the Monks
had not only been very prejudicial to the Popish Monarchy,
but also that the Protestants had set out their
Vices in their natural colours; The Papists have bespattered
the Protestant Ministers with the same Vices as they
were charged withal, and have not only representedthe
infirmities of some particular persons to the World,
but also have laid to their charge the most heinous
crimes they could invent; and afterwards have challenged
their Adversaries to prove the contrary; which Calumnies
have such influence, at least upon the simple and
common sort of People, that it gives them a great aversion
to the Protestants. They also do not want impudence
to set out at a high rate their Miracles, Martyrdoms
and other great Feats, which generally are
transacted in far distant Countries; by which means
they gain a great Credit at least by the inconsiderate
multitude. Among others Edwin sandys an English
Knight has discovered abundance of these tricks in his
Treatise concerning the state of Religion. § 36. Excommunication and Inquisition. The Pope also makes use of more violent means
to maintain his Authority; In former Ages his Excommunication
was a most terrible thing; when whole
Countries were forbidden the exercise of Religious
Worship; by which means the Popes have often obliged
Emperours and Kings to come and creep to the Cross. 
But now adays this Weapon is not frightful to any body

except to some petty states in Italy. Nevertheless in spain
and Italy they have set up a certain Court, which is called
the Office of the Holy Inquisition, where Information
is taken and all such proceeded against as have in any
ways tendred themselves suspected of Heresie: And it
is counted the worst sort of Heresie, if any one attempts
any thing against the Popish Law and Doctrine, or against
the Pope's Authority. This serves for a Bridle to
curb the People withal, and to the Inhabitants of those
Countries is as terrible as the Plague, since matters are
transacted with so much severity in this Court, that
scarce any body, that falls under the Inquisition, escapes
their hands without considerable loss. § 37. some Reasons why the People remain in the Communion of the Church of Rome. 
          Though the supreme Direction and Administration
of the Romish Religion, together with their
other rules, which serve to uphold it, and have been alledged
by us here, are a sufficient awe upon the People;
And besides this, the Popish Clergy know how to manage
their Affairs with that dexterity as to give some satisfaction
to every one; so that I am apt to believe, that
a great many, who live under the Popish subjection, are
verily persuaded, to believe, what the Priests tell them,
to be real, since they want means and opportunity of
being better instructed; Nevertheless it is very probable
that a great many of the more learned and wises sort
are sufficiently convinced, in what manner things are
carried on among them, and that therefore it is in respect
of same particular considerations, that they do not
free themselves from this Yoke. I am apt to believe,
that most are kept back, because they do not see how to
remedy this Evil; And yet they are unwilling to ruin
their Fortunes by going over to the Protestant side,
where they are not likely to meet with so plentiful a
share. These Temptations are not easily to be resisted,
wherefore they think it sufficient for the obtaining of
salvation if they believe in Jesus Christ and trust upon
his Merits, but for the rest think it of no great consequence
if in some matters, which are the inventions of
Priests, they by conforming themselves play the Hypocrite,
and believe as much concerning them as is suitable
with their Opinions. They suppose it to be of no

great consequence, that perhaps the Female sex and
the vulgar sort of People that are always fond of extravagancies,
do believe these things in good earnest. There
are also, questionless, not a few, who not having sufficient
Capacity to distinguish betwixt such Points in Religion,
as are commanded by God, and betwixt such as
are invented by the Clergy for private Ends, and perhaps
coming afterwards to the knowledge of some of
these deceits, they take all the rest for fabulous Inventions,
only covering their Atheistical Principles with an
outward decent behaviour to save themselves the trouble
of being questioned and disturbed. Every Man of
sense may without difficulty imagine how easily a sensible
Italian or spaniard, that never has read the Bible
or any other Protestant Book may fall into this Errour,
if he once has had an opportunity to take notice of the
Intrigues of the Clergy; tho' it is certain, that since the
Reformation of Luther, the Church of Rome has changed
her Habit, and her Garment appears far more decent
than before. But besides this, there are a great many
Persons of Quality as well as of a meaner Condition,
who make their advantage of the Romish Religion,
where they have an opportunity to provide for their
Friends, by putting them either into some Order or other
of Knighthood, or into that of Monks, or other
Ecclesiasticks, by which means a great many Families
are eased of a great Charge, and sometimes are raised
by it. At least the superstitious Parents are well satisfied
when they see their Children are become such saints:
And those that cannot make their Fortunes otherwise,
run into a Monastery, where they are sure to be provided
for. All these conveniences would be taken away
if the Popish Monarchy should fall, and the Church Revenues
were applyed to the use of the state. The Popish
Doctrine also has got so firm footing in those Countries
where it now rides triumphant, that if any of their
Princes should endeavour to root it out, he would find
it a very difficult Task, since the Priests would be for
raising Heaven and Earth against him, and not stick to
find out another James Clement or Ravilliac for their
purpose. Besides this, most of those Princes are tied by
a Political Interest to the Church of Rome, and by introducing

a Reformation cannot propose any advantage to
themselves, but rather cannot but fear very dangerous
Divisions and Innovations. § 38. What states are tied by a particular Interest to the Church of Rome. 
          
         Italy by its particular Interest is obliged to support
the Popish Monarchy, it being much to the advantage
of this Country, that the Pope resides among them,
especially since now a-days no other but Italians do attain
to this Dignity;Italy. so that there is scarce a great Family
in Italy, but some of their Friends have some dependence
on the Roman Chair. Poland. Because the Bishops
and Prebendaries in Poland are always chosen out of
the Nobility; the Noblemen who have the chief
sway of Affairs in that Kingdom are tied to the Popish Interest,
and the Bishops who are there also senators of the
Kingdom, have a great influence in all the Transactions
of any moment. Portugal. The Clergy is very Potent in Portugal,
and in case of any Innovation, would be assisted by the
spaniards; this was the reason why the Portugueses of
late years have been fain to comply with the Pope, notwithstanding
that the Pope to curry favour with spain,
did not many years ago treat them so ill in the matter
of Collation of Bishopricks, which else might have served
them for a fair Pretence, to withdraw themselves
from the Obedience of the Roman Chair. some of the Estates of Germany are to this day adhering
to the Popish Interest;Germany. among the Imperial Cities
that of Cullen is the Chiefest, which City is overrun
with Ecclesiasticks. Besides this, there are abundance
of Counts and others of the Nobility, that hitherto
have not thought fit by turning Protestants, to
exclude themselves from Ecclesiastical Dignities and Benefices. 
Among the Temporal Princes, the Elector of
Bavaria has stuck close to the Romish Religion, because
the House of Bavaria has always had a great Appetite
to the Imperial Crown, which hope it must lay aside, if
it should leave the Popish Religion. What has induced
some Protestant Princes to return to the Romish Communion,
is sufficiently known. Neither is it much to
be admired at, that the present Bishops and Prelates stand
firm to the Popish Interest in Germany, since they
find it more advantageous to be great Princes than

poor Preachers. Besides this, they have been deterred
from undertaking any Reformation by the Example of
two Electors of Collen, which they in the last Age did
begin with a very unfortunate success in their Dominions. 
After Charles V. (being influenced by the spanish
Counsels) did let slip the Opportunity of setling the
Protestant Religion throughout the Empire; the Emperours
have ever since that time, for reasons of state, not
been able to disentangle themselves from the Popish sovereignty
if they had been never so willing. For as the
case now stands, the Ecclesiastical Princes of the Empire
are tied to the Emperour's Interest, from whom they
hope for Assistance against the secular Princes in case
of necessity. But if the Emperour should abandon the
Church of Rome, the whole Clergy would be against
him; and he could not promise himself any certain Assistance
from the secular Princes, especially since some of
the most ancient Houses of those Princes, that now have
laid aside the hope of attaining the Imperial Crown, by
reason of difference in Religion, would then pretend to
have the same right to that Dignity with the House of
Austria. The Pope also upon such an occasion would
not cease to stir up Heaven and Earth against him, and
the King of France would not let slip this Opportunity,
but would with all his might endevour to obtain the
Imperial Dignity, in which design he perhap• might meet
with encouragement from the Clergy. The spaniards pretend to be the greatest zealots of the
Romish Religion,spain. because they stand in need of the
Pope's Favour to assist them in the preservation of the
Kingdom of Naples and the state of Milan; and they
commonly use to lay their Designs under the cover of
preserving and maintaining the Roman Catholick Religion,
wherein, however they have for the most part
miscarried, not to mention here that the Clergy is
very Potent in spain, and that the common People thro'
the false perswasions of the Priests, have got a great aversion
against the Protestants. France does outwardly shew it self not so fond of the
Popish Interest,France. nor has the Gallick Church ever acknowledged
the Pope's absolute Power over her. And whenever
the Pope pretends to encroach upon the Liberty of

the French Church, the Parliament of Paris is ready to
take notice of it. The Doctors also of the sorbon have
rejected several Propositions, which were maintained by
the Pope's Parasites. They also keep so watchful an Eye
over the Pope's Nuncio there, that it is not easy for him
to transgress his Bounds. The Nuncio's, when they go
out of Rome. carry the Cross upright, but as soon as
they enter the Territories of France, they let it down
till such time as they have obtained leave from the King
to exercise their Function, when they are fain to oblige
themselves by their own Hand-writing, that they will
not act otherwise in this station, and no longer than it
pleases the King. They also must make use of a French
secretary, and at their departure, leave behind them a
Register concerning their Negotiation, and also are tired
to several other Formalities, without which, all their
Negotiations are accounted void and of no force. Formalities observed by the Nuncio's in France. 
          From
hence it is that the French say, that the Pope's Nuncio
there, has his Commission both from their King and
the Pope, and that it is precarious, and may be recalled
by the King at pleasure. And it is to be observed that
the Pope's Nuncio pu•s by his Cross in any place where
the King is present, thereby it is intimated that his
Commission ceases when the King is present. Nay, it
is credibly related, that under the Ministry of Cardinal
Richlieu it was debated in France, whether they should
not constitute a Patriarch of their own in that Kingdom▪
tho' as far as I can see, this design would not
have proved so very advantageous to France. For the
Clergy, must needs have become very jealous of the
King's Power, for fear he might take this Opportunity
to retrench their ample Revenues. And if the King of
France has not laid aside his thoughts and pretences upon
the Imperial Crown, he can never suppose to obtain his
aim, if he should withdraw himself from the Roman
Chair. For if so Potent a Prince as the King of Franc•
          is,
should once obtain the Imperial Dignity, it is very likely
he would not only revive the antient Pretensions of the
Emperours upon Rome, which have for a long while
been lying dormant; but he would also under the specious
pretence of protecting the Roman Chair, endeavour
to recover such Possessions as had been •equestred

from the Church of Rome. On the other hand,
the Pope is heartily afraid of a French Monarchy, being
well convinced that it would endeavour a thorough
Reformation of the Court of Rome, and that his Wings
would be clipt to that degree, that in effect he would
be no more than a Patriarch. Neither ought he to exspect
any better treatment if the spanish Monarchy had
been brought to perfection; as either of them must
needs have been destructive to the Protestant Religion. It may therefore be taken for granted that one of the
main Pillars of the Popish Monarchy is the jealousy and
ballance,The main Pillar of the Popish Monarchy. which is to be kept up betwixt these two
Crowns; and that it is the Pope's Interest, as much as
in him lies, to take care that one of these Crowns do
not ruin the other, and set up for an universal Monarchy. 
If we look into the transactions of former times,
we shall find that the Popes have long since observed this
Maxim. 'Tis true, after the death of King Henry II. 
when France was extreamly weakned, the Popes were
forced to be good spanish whether they would or no,
the spaniards having then found out the way to oblige
them to it by fair or foul means. They knew how to
influence the Popes by their Nephews, who were for
setling and enriching their Families, whilest their Kinsmen
were alive. Those they brought over to their
party by granting to them Pensions, Church-Benefices,
large Possessions, great Offices and advantageous Marches;
who in acknowledgement of the same used often
to make the Pope good spanish, even against his inclination;
but if they resisted these temprations, they used to
prosecute these Nephews with a vengeance, after the
Pope's decease. And it was their constant practice in
those days, to exclude such from the Papal Chair, as
they thought were bent against their Interest. But as
soon as France began to recover its strength, the Popes
managed themselves with more indifferency, and shewed
no more favour to either side, than they thought was
suiting with their present Circumstances. It is remarkable
that the Jesuit Guicardus in a sermon preached in
Paris in the 1637. in the Month of July, did say, that
the War which the then King of France waged against

the spaniards, was to be deemed a Holy War, carried
on for the preservation of the Holy Religion. For if
the King of France had not taken up Arms, the spaniards
designs were so laid, as to make the Pope an Almoner
to the King of spain. 
        § 39. The Pope's In•lination towards the Protestants. But as to those who have withdrawn themselves
from the Pope's Obedience, it is certain the Pope would
be glad, if they could be reduced to his Obedience, provided
it might be done by such means, that thereby one
party were not so much strengthened as to become terrible
to all Europe. For it is better to let my Enemy
live, than to kill me and my Enemy at one stroke. It
was for this reason, that we read that Pope Paul III. was
vexed to the heart at the stupendous success of the Emperour
Charles V. against the Protestants, which made
him recall his Troops that were sent to his Assistance. 
And if Philip II. had been successful in his expedition against
England, sixtus V. would questionless have acknowledged
his Errour of assisting him in this Enterprise. 
so Gregory XV. during the Differences betwixt those of
the Valtelins and the Grisons sided with the last, the Protestants
against spain. Neither was Ʋrban VIII. dissatisfied
at the success of Gustavus Adolphus against the
House of Austria, especially since the latter had given
much about the same time an evident instance to the
World, as to the business of Mantua, that they used to
give no better treatment to Roman Catholicks than Protestants. 
some have remarked, that when Ferdinand II. 
did desire some subsidies from the Popes, which he had
promised before, the Pope sent him plenary Indulgences
for him and his whole Army at the point of death, that
they might be prepared to dye with the more Courage. 
And some Years ago, the Court of Rome was no less
concerned at the then prodigious success of France in
Holland, when this state seemed to be reduced to the utmost
extremity. But the chief aim of the Pope is, to
reduce by all manner of Artifices the Protestants to his
Obedience. To obtain this end, he sets the Protestants
together by the Ears, flattereth the Protestant Princes,
and takes care that many of them may marry Roman
Catholick Ladies; the younger Brothers out of the

greatest Families he obliges to come over to his Party,
by bestowing upon them great Dignities and Church-Benefices,
all that will come over to his side are kindly
received and very well used, neither do they write so
much against the Protestant Divines, but rather endeavour
to set up and maintain Controversies among them. 
By these Artifices the Popish Clergy had got very visible
advantages in this Age over the Protestants, and are likely
to get more every day, since they see with the greatest
satisfaction that their Adversaries do weaken themselves
by their intestine Quarrels and Divisions. § 40. From what has been said it is easily to be
judged,No Peace is to be exspected betwixt the Roman Catholicks and Protestants. whether those Differences which are on foot
betwixt the Roman Catholicks and the Protestants may
be amicably composed, either so that both Parties should
remit something of their pretensions, and agree to one and
the same Confession of Faith, leaving some by-Questions
to be ventilated in the Universities; or so that both
Parties may retain their Opinions, and yet, notwithstanding
this Difference, might treat one another like
Brethren in Christ and Members of the same Church. 
Now if we duly weigh the Circumstances of the matter,
and the Popish Principles, such a Peace is to be esteemed
absolutely impossible; since the Difference does not
only consist in the Doctrine, but both Interests are absolutely
contrary to one another. For first the Pope is for
having the Church-Possessions restored; but the Protestant
are resolved to keep them in their possession. The
Pope pretends to be the supreme Head of Christendom, but
the Protestants states will not part with their Prerogative
of having their Direction circa sacra, which they look
upon as a precious Jewel belonging to their sovereignty. 
And to pretend to live in Communion and Amity with
the Pope, and not to acknowledge his sovereignty in
Ecclesiastical Affairs, is an absolute contradiction. In
the same manner, as if I would be called a subject
in a Kingdom, and yet refuse to acknowledge the King's
Authority. Besides this, the infallibility of the Pope is
the Foundation stone of the Popish sovereignty, and if
that is once removed, the whole structure must needs
fall, wherefore it is impossible for the Pope, and that for

reasons of state, to abate any thing from his 〈◊〉
wherein he differs from the Protestants. For if it should
•e once granted that the Pope had hitherto maintained
but one single erroneous point, his infallibility would
them fall to the ground; since, if he has erred in one
point, he may be erroneous in others also. But if the
Protestants should allow the Pope's infallibility, they a•
the same time must deny their whole Doctrine. And it
seems not probable that the Protestants can ever be
brought to contradict and at once to recal their Doctrine
concerning the vanity of the Popish Tenets. Nay,
if it might be supposed that the Laiety should do it, what
must become of the Clergy? Where will they bestow
their Wives and Children? Wherefore, how good soever
the intention may have been of those that have proposed
a way of accommodation betwixt the Papists and
Protestants, which is commonly called syncretism, th•y
are certainly nothing else but very simple and chime•ical
Inventions, which are ridiculed by the Papists; who
in the mean while are well satisfied to see that the Protestant
Divines bestow their labour in vain as to this
point, since they (the Papists) are no loosers, but rather
the gainers by it. For this syncretism does not
only raise great Animosities among the Protestants, but
also does not a little weaken their Zeal against the Popish
Religion: It is easy to be imagined, that some, who
do not thoroughly understand the Differences, and hear
the Divines talk of an accommodation betwixt both Religions,
are apt to perswade themselves, that the Difference
does not lie in the fundamental points; and if in
the mean while they meet with an advantageous proffer
from the Roman Catholicks, are sometimes without great
difficulty prevailed upon to bid farewel to the Protestant
Religion. It is taken for a general Rule, that a
Fortress and a Maiden-head are in great danger, when
once they begin to parly. § 41. But if the Question were put,strength of the Protestants and Papists. whether the
Pope with all his adherents be strong enough to reduce
the Protestants under his Obedience by force; it is evident
enough that the joint power of the Papists is much
superiour to the strength of the Protestants. For Italy,
         
all spain and Portugal, the greatest part of France and
Poland, adhere to the Pope, as also the weakest part
of the swiss Can•ons. In Germany those hereditary Countries
which belong to the House of Austria, the Kingdom
of Bohemia, and the greatest part of Hungary, all
the Bishops and Prelates, the House of Bavaria, the Dukes
of Neuburgh, and Marquisses of Baden, besides some other
Princes of less note; some Coun•s, Lords and others
of the Nobility and some Imperial Cities, besides others
of the Roman Catholick Communion that live under
the Jurisdiction of the Protestant states; all which according
to my computation make up two thirds of Germany. 
There are also a great many Papists in Holland,
neither is England quite free of them. But of the Protestant
side are England, sweden, Denmark, Holland, most of
the secular Electors and Princes, and the Imperial Cities
in Germany. The Hugonots in France are without strength,
and the Protestants in Poland being dispersed throughout
the Kingdom are not to be feared. Curland and the Cities
of Prussia may rest satisfied, if they are able to maintain
the free exercise of their Religion; neither is Transylvania
powerful enough to give any considerable Assistance
to the Protestant Party. The Papists also have
this Advantage above the Protestants, that they all acknowledge
the Pope for the supreme Head of their
Church, and at least to outward appearance, are unanimous
in their Faith; whereas on the contrary, the Protestants
are not joined under one visible spiritual Head,
but are miserably divided among themselves. Divisions of the Protestants. For not
to mention here those sects of lesser note, viz. the Arminians,
socinians, Anabaptists and such like, their main Bod
is divided into two Parties, of very near equal strength,
viz. into the Lutherans and those of the Reformed Religion,
a great many of which are so exasperated against
one another, that they could not be more against the
Papists themselves. Neither are the Protestants united under one Church-Government
or Liturgy,Other Inconveniencies. but each of these states regulate
the same according as they think sit. Neither can
it be denied, but that the Roman Catholick Clergy in
general is more zealous and industrious in propagating
their Religion than the Protestants; a great many of

these making no other use the Church-Benefices, than
to maintain themselves out of them, just as if it were a
meer Trade; and the propagating of the Christian Faith,
is the least of their Care, or at least only their by-work. 
Whereas the Monks and Jesuits gain great applause by
their Missions in the East and West-Indies; and tho
perhaps they brag more than is true of their great success
there, yet is this Institution in the main very praise-worthy. 
Besides this, there is such an implacable jealousy
betwixt some of the Protestant states, that it is not
probable that they will be one and all against the Papists:
not to mention others here, such a jealousy is betwixt
sweden and Denmark. as likewise betwixt England
and Holland. Tho' on the other hand, there is as great
a jealousy betwixt France and spain, which will always
be an obstacle to any union betwixt these two Crowns
against the Protestants. so that notwithstanding the
unequality betwixt the Papists and Protestants, these need
not fear the Pope's Power. Nevertheless, there is a great difference to be made as
to those Protestants,The Hugono•s of France that live in a Protestant state, independent
on any other, and those who live under the jurisdiction
of a Roman Catholick Prince, the latter of
which are not so very well assured of the free enjoyment
of their Religion. For the Hugonoes in France have no
other security but the King's bare Word, and the Edict
of Nantes, which would stand them but in little stead,
if the King of France should be overcome with a Zeal
like to that of the spaniards, or the House of Austria. 
Yet does it not seem probable to me, that the King of
France should easily pretend to force them to another
Religion, as long as they are quiet; since he ought to
consider what great services the Hugonots have done to
Henry IV. without whose Assistance he would in all
likelihood not have been able to obtain the Crown. to Protestants of Poland. 
          It
is not easily to be supposed, that the Poles should raise a
persecution against the Protestants in Curland and Prussia,
especially as long as the City of Dantzick maintains her
Liberty. The Protestants in Germany are so considerable,Of Germany. that
they may be esteemed equal in strength to a Kingdom. 
But their being divided under several Heads, and that

of a different Interest, much abates their strength. And
the Emperours within the space of a hundred Years, have
twice reduced them to that extremity, that both their
Religion and Liberty (which are so linked together,
that one cannot be lost without the other) seemed to be
near gone, if France and sweden had not prevented it. 
'Tis true, there has of late Years a new Maxim been
set up, viz that the Protestants of Germany are now in
a capacity to maintain themselves without the assistance
of the two above-mentioned Crowns, and that
the Elector of Brandenburgh is the most fitly qualified to
be their Head, and to have the Direction among them:
And as it is the Interest of the House of Austria to uphold
them in this belief, so Brandenburgh and Luneburgh
make use of this supposition to cover their designs of getting
into their possession those Provinces, that were
given to sweden as a recompence for having been so instrumental
in preserving the Religion and Liberty of
the Protestants of Germany. But suppose they should compass
their Design, it is most certain that those two Houses
by the addition of those Countries, would be much less
formidable to the Emperour, than they were at that
time when they were upheld by sweden. And it is a
great mistake if they perswade themselves that what assistance
they may exspect from Denmark and Holland,
can countervail what they had from France and sweden. 
If the Emperour should obtain his Ends and drive
those two Nations out of Germany, and restore the spanish
Interest, and then tire out the Estates by sending
great Armies against them, it would be a question who
would be able to oblige the Emperour in such a case to
disband his victorious Forces? Or whether the Emperours
might not under some pretence or another keep
his Army on foot, and oblige the states to provide for
them in their Territories? Whether Brandenburgh and
Lunenbuhgh would be able alone to oppose the Emperour's
design? But if the Protestant Estates should find
themselves not strong enough to resist his Power, it
would be the Question whether these Crowns would
be immediately ready at their demands, or whether
the circumstances of their Affairs would be such, as to
be able to undertake such a task? Or whether at the time

of imminent danger such a one as Gustaous Adolfus,
would be sent down from Heaven, who could act with
the same Fortune and success. For he that believes,
that the Religion is sufficiently secured by seals and
Deeds, or that the Emperours have laid aside all thoughts
of making themselves sovereigns of Germany, if an occasion
should present it self, especially since Religion,
and the recovery of the Church possessions furnishes
them with so specious a pretence, must needs have lost
the memory of all past transactions. But the last Peace
made at Nimmeguen has sufficiently convinced the
World, that these designs could not be put in execution. 
Those Protestant states therefore that are Independent
on other Princes need not fear the power of the
Roman Catholicks. For, as two states that are of the
same Religion, nevertheless differ in state Interests, and
are jealous of one another, which is plainly to be seen
betwixt France and spain, and betwixt England and
Holland; so, though states are of a different Religion,
it is not from hence to be concluded, that if a Potent
Prince of the Roman Catholick Persuasion should attempt
to ruin a Protestant state, the other Roman Catholick
states would not prevent it, if it was for their
Interest to see that Protestant state preserved. The best way then to preserve the Protestant Religion
is,The best way to preserve the Reformed Religion. that each of these states take effectual care,
how the same may be well preserved in their several
states. And this may be done without any crafty inventions,
as the Roman Catholicks are obliged to make
use of, but only by plain and simple means. One of the
main Points is, that both the Churches and schools
may be provided with persons fitly qualified for that
purpose; That the Clergy by their wholesome Doctrine
and a good Life, may shew the way to the rest. 
That the people in general, but more especially such as
in all likelyhood one time or another may have a great
sway in the state, be well instructed in the true and
Fundamental Principles of the Protestant Religion, that
thereby they may be proof against the Temptations of
the Court of Rome, especially when they are to Travel
in Popish Countries. That the Clergy may be so qualified
as to be able to oppose the devises and designs of their

E•••ies, who every day busie themselves in finding out
new Projects against them. some are of Opinion, that the Protestant Party would
be mightily strengthned, if the two Chief Factions among
the Protestants,Whether the Lutherans and those of the Reformed Religion are likely to agree. that besides the difference in their Doctrine,
are also of a different Interest, which seems to
flo•• from their various Opinions, could be reconciled
to one another; and they believe this not impracticable,
if the old hatred, animosities, pride, and selfconceited
Opinions could be laid aside. But if we duly take into
consideration the general inclinations of mankind,
this seems to be a hard supposition. For those who
peruse the Writings of both Parties without partiality
cannot but admire, how their Authors are often obliged
to rack themselves, that they may maintain their Opinions
whether they be consonant to the scriptures or
not: As likewise how they bring to light again the old
Arguments, which have been refuced a thousand times
before. Neither will this do the business, if one Opinion
should be supposed as good as the other; since such
an indifferency would be a shrewd sign, that the whole
must needs be very indifferent to us. Neither can we
without danger declare some Points, in which we differ,
problematical, since I do not see how we can pretend
to have a power to declare a certain Article either
necessary or Fundamental, or problematical. some
therefore have thought upon this expedient, to make a
tryal, whether out of the Articles, wherein both Parties
agree could be Composed a perfect systeme of Divinity,
which might be linked together like one Chain,
according to Art. If this could be effected, though
some different Opinions remained, as long as this Chain
was kept entire, we might be assured that we did not
differ in the Fundamental Points necessary to the obtaining
of salvation; and what remained undecided would
not be of such Consequence as to hinder us from being
united into one Body or Church. But before a true
Judgment can be given of this Proposition, it would
be requisite that such a systeme composed according
to Art, were proposed to the World. For my part I know
no better advice, than to leave it to the direction of
God Almighty, who perhaps one time or another will

put us in the way of finding out a good Expedient. 
For untimely remedies may prove the occasion of new
Divisions. In the mean while it behoves both Parties
notwithstanding these differences to be mindful of their
joint Interest against their Common Enemy, since they
may verily believe that the Pope has no more kindness
for the Lutherans, than for those of the Reformed Religion. But as for the other sects of less note,socinians and Anabaptists. 
         viz. The
socinians, Anabaptists, and such like, it is evident that
their Principles cannot possibly be reconciled with our
Religion; For those who adhere to the first, do not consider
the Christain Doctrine otherwise than a Moral
Philosophy, and the latter scarce know what to believe
themselves. Besides this, the Anabaptists have hatched
out I know not what rules of Policy, which, if not
suppressed in time, must prove destructive to the state. 
But whether the socinians also have any such projects in
their Heads, I am not able to determine, since hitherto
they have not been powerful enough to raise any disturbances
in the state. "
"18","CHAP. XIII. Of the Kingdom of sweden. § 1. THE swedish Historians have out of their
ancient Monuments shown the World,sweden the most antient Kingdom in Europe. 
         
that the Kingdom of sweden is the most
antient Kingdom in Europe, and that
this Country, was, after the Deluge, sooner stored with
Inhabitants than the other parts of Europe. Nevertheless
it is very uncertain who were the first Inhabitants,
and at what time they first settled there, as likewise
whether they were immediately governed by Kings, or
whether the Fathers of Families, had the chief sway
among them, till the Regal was grafted on the Paternal
Power. The names and deeds of their Kings, and the
time of their Reigns are also not easie to be determined,
for the List which has been published of these Kings, is
not so Authentick, but that it may be called in question;
And, as to the transactions of those times, they are most
of them taken out of antient songs and Fabulous Legends,
and some of them out of the allegorical Traditions
of their antient Poets or scalders, which have perhaps
been wrongly interpreted by some Authors. And Johannes
Messenius in his scandinavia Illustrata, does not
stick to say, that the old swedish Historiographer Johannes
Magnus did strive to outdo in his bragging History,
the Danish Historian sanno Grammaticus. 
         First Founders of the Gothick Nation. 
         Johannes
Magnus Makes Magog, the son of Japhet Grandson
of Noah, the first Founder of the schytick and Gothick
Nations, and says that from his two sons sweno,
and Gether and Geg, the swedish and Gothish Nations had
their names. He relates, that after this Family was extinguished,
sweden was during the space of four hundred
years under the Government of certain Judges,
and that about eight hundred years after the Deluge,
both the Kingdoms of the swedes and Gothes were united

under Bericus, who in person planted a Colony of
the Gothes beyond the seas, after having Conquered
the Ʋlmirugii, who then inhabited Prussia, from whence
he extended his Conquests over the Vandals. A considerable
time after, these Nations did settle themselves
not far from the Mouth of the River Danube near the
Black sea, from whence having under taken several Expeditions
both into Asia and Europe, at last in the third
and fourth Centuries after the Birth of Christ, did enter
the Roman Provinces on this side of the Danube, and
carried their Conquering Arms into Italy and spain,
where they erected two Kingdoms. But the greatest
part of this Relation is contradicted by Messenius,
who also rejects the List which Johannes Maginis h••
given us, of the Kings before our soviour's Birth, alledging
that the times before Christ's Nativity, are all
involved in fabulous Narrations, as to those Northern
parts, and that most of these Kings lived after the
Birth of our s•viour. But, since even the Chronology
of the first 〈◊〉 after Christ's Nativity, and the
Genealogy of those Kings it somewhat uncertain in
these Contries, it will suff•ce to mention here some
few of the most famous among them, till the latter
times furnish us with an opportunity to relate things
with more certainty. § 2. sixty years before the Birth of Christ, the famous
Othin or Woden,
         Othin or Woden. having been driven by Pomp•y
out of Asia with a great number of people, first Conquered
Bussas, afterwards the saxons and Danes, and
last of all Norway and sweden, about twenty four years
before Christ's Birth. Othin kept for himself sweden only,
yet so, that all the other scandinavian Princes should
own him a• their supreme Lord, from whence came
that Custom which was used for several hundred years
after, viz. That at the great and general meetings of
these Nations, the King of Denmark used to hold the
Bridle of the King of sweden's Horse, whilst he mounted
it, and the King of Norway the stirrup. He was succeeded
by Frotho surnamed. Frotho. 
         Jorgo, who covered the
Temple at Ʋpsal with Gold, and surrounded its Pinacle
with a golden Chain. After him were these following

Kings Niord, sigtrug, Asmund, Ʋffo, Hynding, Regner,
Halvard, Helgo, Attilus, Hother, Roderick surnamed
singabond, Hogmor, and Hogrin, Erick, Haldan, sivand,
Erick, Haldan, Ʋngrin, Regnald. About the year 588. 
Rodolf was King of the Gothes, but being vanquished by
the English, whom he left in the possession of that Kingdom,
he himself fled into Italy, where he sought sanctuary
of Dicterick the King of the Gothes. In the mean
while Frotho, either the son, or else a Kinsman of
Regnald, was King of sweden, whom succeeded these
following Kings Fiolmus, swercher, Valander, Vislur,
who was burnt by his own sons. Damalder, who was
sacrificed by his own subjects to their Idol at Ʋpsal. 
Domar, Digner, Dager, Agnius, who was hanged by
his own Wife. Alrick and Erick, who flew one another
in a single Combat, Ingo, Hugler, Haco, Jerundar,
Hacquin surnamed Ring, under whose Reign that most
memorable Battel at Brovalla was fought,Battel fought near Brovalla. 
          betwixt the
swedes and Danes, where thirty thousand Men were
killed on the Danish, and twelve thousand on the
swedish side. This King sacrificed nine of his sons to
the Idol at Ʋpsal, and would have done the same with
the tenth, who was the only Heir left to the Kingdom,
if he had not been prevented by the swedes. Him succeeded
his son Egillus, whom followed in the Kingdom
of sweden, Othar, Adel, Ostan, Ingvard, Amund, sivard,
Hirot or Herolt, who married his Daughter Thera
to Regnerthethen King of Denmark. 
         Ingellus. 
         Ingellus the son of
Amund, succeeded Hirot in the Kingdom of sweden;
who, the night after his Coronation caused seven of
those petty Princes, that were Vassals of the Crown
of sweden to be burnt in their Lodgings; and afterwards
exercised the same Cruelty against five more of
the same Rank. His Daughter Asa, that was married
to Gudrot a Prince of schonen, exceeded her Father in
Cruelty, for having murthered her Husband and his Brother,
she betrayed the Country to the Enemies; which
so exasperated Ivan, the son of Regner, King of Denmark,
that he fell with great fury upon Ingellus, who
had taken his Daughter into his Protection, destroying
all with Fire and sword. Ingellus being reduced to the
utmost extremity, by the advice of his Daughter

burnt himself, his Daughter, and the whole Family, in
his own Palace, except his son Olaus, who sheltered
himself in Wermeland. After the death of Ingellus, a
certain Nobleman, of an antient Family in sweden,
whose name was Charles, assumed the Royal Title and
Power, but Regner King of Denmark, who pretended
that it belonged to his son, did send a challenge to
the said Charles, and having killed him in the Combat,
transferred the Kingdom of sweden to his son Bero or
Biorn, who was Hirots Daughters son. § 3. Bero. Under the Reign of this Bero or Biorn, Ansgarius,
a Monk of Corvey,
         A. C. 829. and afterwards Bishop of Bremen,
was sent into sweden,
         The Christian Doctrine first taught in sweden. 
          by the Emperour Lewis the
Pious, to Preach the Gospel in that Kingdom. But the
King refusing to hearken to his Doctrine, was by the
swedes banished the Kingdom, together with his Father
Regner. 
         Amund. His successor Amund did also Rule but a very
few years, and having raised a most horrible Persecution
against the Christians, was also banished the Kingdom. 
The swedes being quite tired out with Amund's
tyrannical Government,Olaus. did call in Olaus, out of
Wermeland to be their King, who to establish himself
in the Throne, married the Daughter of Regner to his
son Ingo, and thereby obtained the quiet possession of
the two Kingdoms of the swedes and Gothes. 
         A. C. 853. Not many
years after Ansgarius rerurned into sweden, and Converted
Olaus, (who then resided at Birca a most populous
City) to the Christian Faith. Olaus then marched
with a Potent Army into Denmark, and having committed
the Administration of that Kingdom to his son
Ennigruus, returned into sweden; where he was by his
Heathen subjects sacrificed to their Idol at Ʋpsal. His
son Ingo,
         Ingo. the better to Establish himself in the Throne,
married the King of Denmark's Daughter,A. C. 890. and afterwards
was killed in the War against the Russians. Him
succeeded his son Erick surnamed Weatherhat,
         Erick. famous for
his skill in Witchcraft, who was succeeded by his son
Erick surnamed seghersell,
         Erick seghersell. who Conquered Finland,
Curland, Livonia, and Ehestland From Denmark he
retook Halland and schonen, and at last drove the
Danish King swen out of Denmark, who could not recover

his Kingdom till after his death. stenchill the Mild. His son stenchill,
surnamed the Mild, was Baptized at sigtuna
(a great City at that time) and having destroyed the Idol
at Ʋpsal, and forbid his subjects upon pain of death to
sacrifice to the Idols, the Pagans were so enraged thereat,
that they slew and burnt him near Ʋpsal, and with
him the two Christian Priests that were sent to him by
the Bishop of Hamburgh. 
         Olaus. His Brother Olaus nevertheless
obtained from King Etheldred of England several Christain
Priests, who not only preached the Gospel in
sweden, but also the King, and a great number of People
were Baptized by one of these called sigfried in a
Fountain called Husbye, which is called st. sigfrieds
Kalla Wel to this day. This Olaus was surnamed skotkonung,
because upon the persuasion of the English
Priests he granted to the Pope a yearly Tax against the
saracens, which was called Romskot. This Olaus took
from Oluf Tryggeso the Kingdom of Norway, which he
however recovered afterwards. This Olaus skotkonung
was also the first who made a perfect union betwixt the
two Kingdoms of the swedes and Gothes,
         The swedes and Gothes united in one Kingdom. who had hitherto
been often at great enmity with one another. To Olaus succeeded his son Amund, under whose
Reign the Christian Religion increased very succesfully
in sweden;
         Amund. after whom Reigned his Brother Amund,
surnamed slemme,
         Amund slemme. a Man very negligent both in maintaining
Religion and Justice. He was slain with the
greatest part of his Army by Cnut King of Denmark,
near a Bridge called strangepelle. After his death the
Gothes and swedes disagreed about the Election of a
new King,Haquin the Red. the first choosing Haquin surnamed the Red. 
the latter stenchill the younger. At last it was agreed
betwixt them, that Haquin being pretty well in years
should remain King during his life, and should be succeeded
by stenchill. After the death of Haquin, who
Reigned thirteen years,stenchill. 
         stenchill the younger, Olaus
skotkonung's sisters son, began his Reign, who vanquished
the Danes in three great Battels. Him succeeded
Ingo surnamed the Pious. 
         Ingo the Pious. This King utterly
destroyed the Idol at Ʋpsal, which so enraged his Pagan
subjects, that they Banished him the Kingdom,
and afterwards murthered him in schonen, he was buried

in a Convent called Wa•hei••
          in West-Gothland. After
him reigned with great applause his Brother Halstan,
         Halstan. 
whom succeeded his son Philip
         A. C. 
         Ingo, Philip's son,
and his Queen Ragoild,
         1086. were also very famous for their
Piety and other Vertues:Philip. Ingo. she was after her death
honoured as a saint,A. C. and her Tomb frequently visited at
Talge. 
         1138. This King left no sons, but two Daughters,
Christina and Margret, the first was married to st. Erick,
the second to Magntis King of Norway. He was
poisoned by the East Gothes, who were grown weary of
the swedish Government. Under the Reign of these
five last Kings there were golden times in sweden, the
Christian Faith was then Established and the subjects
lived in Peace and Plenty. § 4. After the death of Inge, the East Gothes, without
the consent of the other Provinces, made one
Ragwald Knaphofde,
         Ragwold Knaphofde. a Man of great bodily strength,
but of no great Wisdom, their King, who was slain
by the West Gothes. In his stead the East Gothes chose
swercher II. swercher II. 
          a very good King, who nevertheless was
murthered by one of his servants. After the death of
swercher, the East Gothes chose his son Charles for
their King, but the sw•des at their General Assembly at
Ʋpsal Elected Erick the son Josward,
         Erick the Holy. he having married
Christina the Daughter of Ingo surnamed the Pious. 
But both the swedes and Gothes considering afterwards,
how necessary it was to keep up the Union betwixt
these two Kingdoms, made an agreement that Erick
should remain King over both Kingdoms, but that
Charles should succeed him, and that afterwards their
Heirs should Rule the Kingdom in the same manner in
their several turns. This Erick having reduced the
Finns to their former Obedience, obliged them to receive
the Christian Doctrine. A. C. He also ordered the antient
Constitutions of the Kingdom to be Collected into
one Book,1154. which was called after his name st. Erick's
Law. He was slain in the Meadows near Ʋpsal by
Magnus the King of Denmark's son, who having first
defeated his Army, was proclaimed King. 1160. But the
swedes and Gothes under the Conduct of Charles the son
of swercher, fell again with such fury upon the Danes,
         
that they killed all the Danes with their King and his
son upon the spot, and out of the spoil built a Church
near Ʋpsal which they called Denmark,
         Charles the son of swercher. 
         Charles therefore,
the son of swercher became King of Denmark,
who Reigned with a general applause;1168. till Cnut the
son of Erick returned out of Norway,
         Cnut Erickson. and under pretence
that he had abetted his Father's death, surprised
and killed him. His Lady and Children fled into Denmark,
where having got some assistance they joined
with the Gothes under the Conduct of Kell, the Brother
of Charles, to recover the Kingdom, but their
General was killed upon the spot, and their Forces
dispersed by Cnus Erickson. After which he Reigned
very peaceably for the space of twenty three years. 
After the death of Cnut,
         swercher III. 
          
         swercher the son of Charles
was made King of swedeland, but had for his Rival
Erick, the son of the last deceased King. At last the
difference was thus Composed, that swercher should
remain King during his life, but should be succeeded by
Erick. But swercher, who notwithstanding this agreement
was for settling the Crown upon his Family, did
barbarously murther all the sons of Cnut, except Erick,
         1207. 
who escaped into Norway; from whence he returned
with some Forces, and being assisted by the swedes
vanquished swercher, who fled into West Gothland. 
Having obtained succours of sixteen thousand Men,
from Weldemar, the King of Denmark, he attempted
to recover his Kingdom, but was miserably beaten by
Erick's Army, he himself narrowly escaping into
Denmark;
         1208. from whence he not long after again fell into
West Gothland,
         1210. but was again defeated and slain in
the Battel,Erick Cnutson. Leaving Erick Cnutson in the quiet possession
of the Throne, who renewed the former agreement
made betwixt those two Families, and Constituted
John the son of swercher his successour in the Kingdom. 
He married Ricnet the sister of Waldemar King
of Denmark,
         1219. and dyed in Wisingsoe. Him succeeded
according to agreement, John the son of swercher, who
Reigned but three years and dyed also in the Isle of
Wisingsoe, which was the general place of residence of
the swedish Kings in those days. 
§ 5. Erick Lespe. After the death of John, Erick, the son of the
former King Erick, became King of sweden, who being lame,
and besides this lisping, was surnamed the
Lisper. There was about that time a very Potent Family
in sweden called the Tolekungers, who aimed at the
Crown. To bring these over to his Party the King had
married three of his sisters to three of the Chiefest among
them, he himself having married Catharine the
Daughter of sweno Tolekunger. But these being grown
more Potent by this Alliance; Cnut Tolekunger rebelled
against the King, and having worsted him, obliged him
to fly into Denmark; from whence he soon returned
with a strong Army and vanquished Tolekunger, and
having caused him and Halingar his son to be slain, restored
the Peace of the Kingdom. Under the Reign
of this King it was that Gulielmus sabinensis the Pope's
Legat did first forbid the Priests in sweden to Marry,
whereas before that time it had been a common Custom
among the Priests there to Marry,Celibacy of Clergy introduced in sweden. 
          as well as
Laymen. This Erick under the Conduct of his Brother
in Law Birger Yerl forced the Finnes to return to
Obedience, and to receive the Christian Faith, and
built several Fortresses upon their Frontiers. 1250. He dyed
without Issue in Wisingsoe. Whilst Birger Yerl was absent
in Finland,
         Waldemar. the states made Waldemar the eldest
son of Birger Yerl their King, as being the deceased
King's sisters son:1251. Who being Crowned in the year next
following, the Administration of the Kingdom was
committed during his minority to his Father Birger, who
augmented the antient Law Book, and deserved so well
of the Publick, that upon the request of the Estates he
was created a Duke, whereas before he had been only
an Earl, or as it is in their antient Language Yerl. He
met with great opposition from the Tolekungers, who
had not quite laid aside their pretensions to the Crown,
so that their jealousie at last broke out into open War. 
But the Duke, under pretence of making an agreement
with them, after having granted them a safe Conduct
persuaded them to give him a meeting, where having
made them all Prisoners caused them to be Executed,
except Charles Tolekunger who fled into Prussia, and remained

there all his life time. Things being thus settled,
he gave to his son, in Marriage, sophia the Daughter
of Erick King of Denmark,
         1263. and laid the first foundation
of the Castle and City of stockholm; and tho his son
was become of Age, yet did he never surrender the Government
to him as long as he lived. 1266. He died after he
had been Regent fifteen years, leaving four sons, Waldemar
King of sweden, Magnus Duke of sudermanland,
Erick of smaland, and Benedict of Finland, who afterwards
raised great Disturbances: for Waldemar having,
during his Pilgrimage to Rome and Jerusalem, left the
Administration of the Kingdom to his Brother Magnus,
at his return accused him of having aimed at the Crown. 
The states of sweden held an Assembly at strengness to compose
these differences if possible;1275. but met with so much
difficulty that it was impossible to be effected. Wherefore
Magnus and Erick being retired into Denmark, soon
returned from thence with a considerable Force; and
having routed the Vanguard of King Waldemar, made
him their Prisoner. Whereupon Magnus called together
the Estates of the Kingdom; who being most of them
of his Party, did assign the whole Kingdom to Duke
Magnus, except only East and West Gothland, smaland
and Daht, which the King was to have for his share. 
But this Agreement lasted not long; for the Danes,
who had not received their subsidies promised by Magnus,
siding with Waldemar, the War was renewed,
which was carried on with various success; till at last
the Danes, having received satisfaction for the Money
due to them, left Waldemar in the lurch, who, in the
presence of the Estates, resigned the Kingdom to Magnus. 
        § 6. Magnus. 
         Waldemar having resigned the Kingdom, Magnus
was crowned at Ʋpsal:
         1279. who resumed the Title of
King of the swedes and Goths, which had not been used
by his Predecessors ever since the time of Olaus skotkanung,
but is since retained by the Kings of sweden to
this day. Under this King's reign the Family of the
Tolekungers began to raise new Commotions, and being
assisted by some of the Nobilty, murthered Ingemar
Danschkep the King's Favourite, and took Gerhard the

E. of Holstein and Father-in-law to the K. Prisoner, laying
also close siege to the Castle of Joncoring; which obliged
the K. to appea•e them for that time by fair Promises:
but not long after the E. was released, the K. accused them
before the Assembly of the Nobility of High Treason, and
caused them all to be executed at stockholm, except Philip
of Runby, who was fain to redeem his Life at a very
dear Rate. And with this stroke the Greatness of the
Family of the Tolekungers was quite laid in the dust. 
Having thus settled his Affairs, he got his Lady Hederig
crowned at suderasping; and, with the advice of the
senators, made King Waldemar a Prisoner in the Castle
of Nicoping,
         1288. where he died four years after. Magnus
died in Wisignioc,
         1290. but was buried at stockholm in the
Church of the Grey Friars, having left the Tuition of
his son Birger, who was but eleven years of age, and
the Care of the Kingdom to Torckell C•utson the RixMarshal. 
Torckell Cnutson was Regent for the space of
thirteen years,Birger II. 
          during which time he also imprisoned
King Waldemar's son; but after their decease he sent
an Army into Car•lia, and having subdued this Nation,
and induced them to receive the Christian Faith, he
built on their Frontiers the Fortress of Wibourg, and
took from the Russians Kekhelm. 
         1292. King Birger being by
this time come to his riper Years, married Mereta the
Daughter of Erick King of Denmark; and having sent
new forces into Carelia and Ingermania,
         1298. built the Fortress
of Norburgh on the Frontiers of Russia, which however
a few years after was retaken and demolished by the
Russians. soon after he declared his son Magnus, who
was but three years old his successor in the Kingdom,1303. 
which was confirmed by the chief Men of the Kingdom,
and especially by his Brothers. But this solemn Transaction
was of no long continuance, for the Brothers
quickly fell into divisions among themselves, and the
two younger growing mistrustful of the King, the Marshal
retired first into Denmark, and from thence into
Norway, to make use of that King's Intercession to recover
their Inheritance, which King Birger had seised
upon; but all this proving ineffectual, they made several
Inroads into West-Gothland, and killed and dispersed the
swedish Troops that were sent to oppose them. The

King went at last in person with an Army, and was met
by his Brothers with some Forces, which they had obtained
of the King of Norway; when by the Intercession
of some senators, the Differences betwixt the Brothers
were composed, and the two younger restored to
their Estates in sweden. This Agreement cost the old
Torcell his Head,1305. who, under pretence of having upheld
the Ammosities betwixt the Brothers, and some other
matters laid to his charge, was beheaded at stockhelm. 
But no sooner was this Wise Man dead, but the two
younger Brothers began to aim again at the Crown, and
having surprised the K. and Q. at their Country seat
called Hatuna forced him to resign the Kingdom, and to
surrender the Crown and City of stockholm to his Brother
Erick, who made the King a Prisoner in the Castle of
Nicoping; but his son Magnus was, during this Tumult,
carried into Denmark. The King of Denmark undertook
3 several Expeditions to relieve his Brother-in-law and
sister, but to no great purpose, only that at last it was agreed,
that the King, Queen and their Children should
be set at liberty, and the matter decided in the Assembly
of the senate of the Kingdom. The senate therefore
having been called together at Ar•oga, it was there concluded,
That in case King Birger would pardon all past
Injuries, and be contented with what part of the Kingdom
should be assigned to him, he should be set at liberty:
which was performed accordingly, the senate
and his Brothers having again sworn fealty to him. 
Thus matters seemed to be composed for the present,
when not long after a greater storm broke out. 1308. 
         Erick
the King of Denmark, having made an Alliance with
Haquin King of Norway, came with an Army of 60000
Men into sweden, to assist King Birger in bringing his
Brothers under his subjection: their first success was
answerable to their great Preparations, having taken
Joncoping, and forced the Duke's Forces to fly before
them; but the Danes, who began to be in want of Provision,
being most of them gone home, there was a
Meeting appointed betwixt the Brothers to be held at
Helsinburgh, where the former Agreement made at A•
           bega
was renewed; by virtue of which Duke Erick, was
to have West Gothland, Daht, Halland, Wermeland,
         
and smal•nd; Duke Waldemar was to have for his share
Ʋpland, Oeland and part of Finland; the rest was to remain
under the King, and the Dukes to hold their Possessions
in Fief from him. Thus all Animosities seemed
to be laid aside, and the three Brothers lived in great
splendor, striving to out-do one another in Magnificence;
which occasioning some new Taxes, proved also
the occasion of some Insurrections in the Kingdom,
which were nevertheless happily appeased, and Peace
restored to the whole Kingdom. In the mean while Duke Waldemar in his journey
from Calmar to stockholm, gave a visit to the King at
Nycoping, who not only treated him with extraordinary
Civility, but also desired him to return and bring his
Brother along with him, by which means he hoped that
the very seeds of their former Animosities betwixt them
might be rooted out. 
         1317. 
         Waldemar, being overcome by these
fair Promises, over-persuaded his Brother Erick, who
was very averse to it at first, but at last consented. Being
arrived in the Castle where the King was, they were
kindly received and splendidly entertained at supper;
but they had not been long in bed, and most of their
servants dispersed into several Quarters of the Town,
till they were made Prisoners, beaten, abused, and half
naked, loaden with Irons, thrown into a strong Tower,
their servants having been all either killed or taken Prisoners. 
The King marched directly for stockholm, in
hopes to surprise the City; but the News of this barbarous
act having been already carried to stockholm, they
not only repulsed him, but also pursued him to Nycoping. 
The King perceiving that they intended to besiege Nycoping,
retired to stockeburgh; but before his departure,
having caused the Doors of the Prison to be barricadoed
up, he threw the Keys into the River, and commanded
upon pain of death, not to open the Doors till his return. 
soon after Nycoping was besieged, but before it
could be forced both the Brothers died by Famine. King
Birger having by this Treacherous fact animated the
whole Kingdom against him, sought for Aid in Denmark;
and having obtained some Forces, shifted with them
from place to place, till some of them were suprized at
sudercoping, and the Danish Horse having also left Nycoping,
         
the King, destitute of all, retired with the Queen
into Gethland, leaving his son Magnus in the Castle of
stegeburgh. The swedes having immediately after invested
the Place, forced it to surrender by Famine, and
sent Magnus a Prisoner to stockholm. The senate of the
Kingdom made there Matthew 〈◊〉
          Regent of
sweden,
         1319. who vigorously prosecuted the Remnants of the
King's Party, which obliged King Birger to seek for shelter
to Christopher King of Denmark. 
        § 7. Magnus smocck. After K. Birger had left Gothland, the Estates assembled
at Ʋpsal, chose for their King Magnus the son of
D. Erick being then but 3 years old. The Year next following
Magnus the son of K. Birger, notwithstanding
that the senate and Estates of the Kingdom had sworn
Fealty to him as to their future King, was villainously
sentenced to death and beheaded accordingly, and King
Birger and his Queen died soon after for Grief. But the
swedes, who had conceived great hopes of their new
King, found themselves extreamly deceived in their Expectation
after the death of of Ketelmundson, who at first
managed affairs with great Prudence. For the King being
now of age married Blanch the Daughter of an Earl
of Namur, and laying aside the old Counsellors made
use of the Advice of his young Favourites, among whom
one Benedict born in West-Gothland had the chief place. 
The Inhabitants of schonen being sorely oppressed by
the Holsteiners, put themselves under his protection,
which was afterwards confirmed by Waldemar King of
Denmark, and the sound, by common consent, made
the common Borders of these two Kingdoms on that side. 
After he had ruled twelve years in peace, he undertook
an Expedition against the Russians, which succeeded
very ill, being obliged to redeem the peace by the surrender
of a part of Carelia. His Treasury having by
this War been mightily exhausted, he not only imposed
new and heavy Taxes upon the people, but also pawned
a great many of the Crown Lands. Pope Clement VI. 
also had excommunicated him because he had applied
the Revenues of s. Peter, given to the Roman Chair
by Olaus skotkonung, to the use of the Russian War. 
The People being extreamly discontented at these Proceedings,

the sena•e perswaded the King that he should
cause his two sons to be declared Kings, viz. Brick of
sweden, and Haquin of Norway, which was done accordingly. 
The Nobility being now headed by a new
King▪ began to withdraw from their obedience to the
old King, and killed his Favourite Benedict. The King
who now began to see his Errors, sought for Aid from
the King of Denmark, which so exasperated the Nobility,
that they obliged the young King to take up Arms
against his Father, which occasioned a bloody War, till
at last the Kingdom was divided betwixt them, the Father
having got Ʋpland, Gothland, Wermeland, Dabt,
North-Halland,
         1357. 
         West-Gothland and Ocland. But sh•••n,
Bleckingen, south-Halland, East-Gothland, smaland and
Finland fell to the son's share. But notwithstanding this agreement, the jealousie continued
betwixt the Father and son, and not long after
the Father having sent for his son under pretence of
some Business of great moment, he was there poysoned
by his Mother. By his death King Magnus being put
again into the possession of the whole Kingdom, studied
nothing but revenge against the Nobility. The better
to encompass his design, he made an under-hand Alliance
with the King of Denmark unto whom he surrendred
shonen again; who not only took possession of it,
but also by connivance of King Magnus fell into Gothland
and Oeland,
         1361. where he killed a great many Boors,
plundered the whole Country, and demolished Borgholm. 
The swedes being thus put to a nonplus submit themselves
to the protection of Haquin King of Denmark, who
made his Father Magnus a Prisoner in the Castle of Calmar. 
The senate of the Kingdom then perswaded
King Haquin to marry the Daughter of Henry Earl of
Holstein, which he seemingly consented to at that time. But
the Bride in her Voyage into sweden, having been driven
on the Coast of Denmark, was detained by Waldemar
King of Denamark, who intended to marry his Daughter
to King Haquin. Albert Duke of Me•klenburgh and
the Earls of Holstein did denounce War against the King
of Denmark if he did not release the Bride, but King
Waldemar had in the mean while so well managed the
Affairs with Haquin, that he resolved to marry Margaret
         
his Daughter. The Bride was then set at Liberty, but
being arrived in sweden was so slightly received by King
Magnus, who in the mean time had obtained his Liberty,
that she retired into a Nunnery; and those senators who
urged the King to perform his Marriage Contract, were
by Magnus banished the Kingdom,1363. who soon after married
his son to Margaret, that was then but eleven years
old. At this Wedding which was held at Copenhagen,
Waldemar caused the Parents of Haquin to be poysoned,
which worked so violently upon Blenha, that she died
immediately, but King Magnus was preserved by the
skill of his Physicians. § 8. Albert Duke of Mecklenburgh. Those swedish Lords that were banished by King
Magnus, having for some time lived in Gothland did at
last agree among themselves to elect Henry Earl of Holstein,
King of sweden. But he being a Man in years,
and not willing to entangle himself in those troublesome
Affairs, recommended to them Albert Duke of Mecklenburgh,
King Magnus's sisters son. The banished Lords
therefore having chosen his second son, whose name also
was Albert their King, carried him into Gothland, and
from thence to stockholm, which they easily took, being
assisted by a strong party within the City. Having then
called together such of the Nobility as they knew to be
Enemies to King Magnus, they proclaimed Albert King
in the City of stockholm. 
         1364. 
         Magnus and his son having
thereupon got together considerable Forces both in sweden
and Denmark, marched against King Albert into Ʋpland,
and were met him near by Encoping, where a bloody
Battle ensued, the Victory inclined to Albert's side,
King Magnus was taken Prisoner, Haquin wounded but
escaped the Hands of his Enemies. During the imprisonment
of King Magus,
         1365. 
         sweden was reduced to a most
miserable estate, by the Wars that were carried on betwixt
King Albert and Haquin and Waldemar, the two
last sending continual supplies into sweden to uphold
their Party, and Haquin was grown so strong, that he
defeated King Albert in a Battel and besieged stockholm. 
At last it was agreed that King Magnus should have his
Liberty,1371. paying a Ransom of 12000 Marks of sine silver,
and resign the Crown of sweden and shonen to

King Albert, which was performed accordingly, King
Magnus retiring into Norway, where he was drowned
by accident. King Haquin did not long survive his Father,
and his son Olaus dying very young, Queen Margaret
after his decease was sole Queen of Norway. By
the Death of this Olaus, the antient Race of the swedish
Kings was extinguished, which ever since the time of
st. Erick viz. for the space of 220 Years had ruled in
sweden. 
         1376. Not long after, Waldemar King of Denmark
died without leaving any Male Heirs behind him. In
whose stead the Danes to unite Norway with Denmark,
declared his Daughter Margaret their Queen. King
Albert by the Death of his Enemies being now established
in the Throne of sweden began to slight the swedish
Nobility, and to employ the Germans in his service,
who grew very Rich and Potent; and his Treasury being
exhausted by the war which was carried on against
Denmark he demanded from the states that part of the
Revenues of the Clergy, and some of the Lands which
belonged to the Nobility should be incorporated with
the Crown, which they refusing to consent to, he nevertheless
pursued his Intentions by open Violence. Whilest
therefore some that were no loosers by it and hoped to
partake of the Booty, sided with the King, the rest
were consulting how to deliver themselves from these
oppressions, and having renounced their obedience to
King Albert,
         Margaret. sought for Protection by Margaret Queen
of Denmark, which she granted them, upon condition
that if she should deliver them from King Albert, she
was to be Queen of sweden. Which the swedes being
forced to accept of, she was proclaimed Queen of
sweden. This proved the occasion of unspeakable miseries,
both Parties committing great Outrages in the
Country, which was quite exhausted before, by King
Albert who also at last was forced to pawn the Isle of
Gothland for 20000 Nobles to the Prussian Knights of
the Cross;12. sept. notwithstanding which being not able to
defray at length the Charges of the War,1388. he challenged
Queen Margaret to a Battel to be fought in the Plains
of Talkoping in West-Gothland. 
         The Battel of Tal•oping. 
          The appointed day being
come, a bloody Battel was fought in the beforementioned
Plain, where the Queen's Forces at last obtained

the Victory, King Albert and his son being taken
Prisoners. But this Victory rather encreased than diminished
the miseries under which the Kingdom had groaned
before, because the Dukes of Mocklenburgh; Earls of
Holstein and the Hanse Towns sided with King Albert's
Party, who sent constant supplies from Rostock and
Wismar by sea to stockholm, Calmar and other strongholds
in their possession, from whence the German Garrisons
made miserable havock all round the Country,
and the sea Coasts were extreamly infested by Privateers,
which had quite ruined the Trade of the Kingdom. 
This pernicious War having thus lasted seven
Years, a Treaty of Peace was set on foot at Helsingburgh,
which proving fruitless,1394. another meeting was appointed
at Aleholm,
         1395. where it was agreed that the King, his son,
and the rest of the Prisoners of note should be set at Liberty,
under condition that he within the space of three
Years, resign all his pretensions to the Kingdom unto
Queen Margaret, or else return to Prison; and that in
case of failure, the Cities of Lubeck, Hamburgh, Dantzick,
Thorn, Elbingen, saralsund, stetin and Campen
should oblige themselves to pay 60000 Marks of fine
silver to the Queen. Thus King Albert returned into
Mecklenburgh, after he had reigned 23 Years in sweden. 
He had notwithstanding this agreement not laid aside
his hope of recovering his Kingdom, for which he had
made great preparations, if his son had not died, two
Years after, when he at the appointed time resigned his
pretensions, and the places as yet in his possession to
the Queen, and at last ended his days in his native
Country of Mecklenburgh. Thus Margaret became
Queen over all the three Northern Kingdoms, which
she governed with extraordinary Wisdom, yet so that
the Danes were much better satisfied with her Government
than the swedes. 
        § 9. Erick Duke of Pomerania. Queen Margaret having restored Peace to the
Northren Kingdoms, her next care was to unite these
three Crowns for ever on one Head. For which purpose
she had sent for Henry a young Duke of Pomerania,
her sister's son, whose name to please the swedes, she

changed into that of Erick. 
         Union made at Calmar betwixt sweden, Denmark and Norway. 
          This Prince, tho' very
young, was in the second Year after the releasing of
King Albert, proclaimed King. In the Year next following,
the senators and Nobility of all the three Kingdoms
being assembled at Calmar,
         1396. where also the young
Erick was crowned, the Union of the three Kingdoms
was proposed, which at last was perfected and confirmed
by Oath and by the Hands and seals of the states
of the three Kingdoms; which might have tended to the
great Advantage of these three Nations, if the Danes
had not afterwards broke this Union, and endeavoured
to make themselves Masters of sweden, which proved
the occasion of bloody Wars betwixt these two Kingdoms. 
But because King Erick was but very young
Queen Margaret had the administration of Affairs during
his Minority, when the swedes and Norwegians soon
perceived that the Articles of this Union were likely to
be but ill observed, since the Queen preferred the Da•es
and other strangers much before them, and what Taxes
she levied in sweedland, were for the most part spent in
Denmark, where she generally resided. In the eighth
Year after King Erick was crowned, Queen Margates
attempted to re-gain the Isle of Gothland from the Prussian
Knights, without paying the Ransom; but having
not succeeded in her Enterpise, she redeemed it for 10000
Nobles. 1410. King Erick being by this time come to his
riper Years,1412. married Philippa the Daughter of Henry IV. 
King of England, and having after his Aunt's Death,
which happened not long after, taken upon him the sole
management of Affairs, he was intangled in a tedious
War with Henry Earl of Holstein, the Hanse Towns, and
the Dukes of Mecklenburgh and saxony, about the Dutchy
of sleswick, which at last cost him his three Kingdoms. 
For his subjects being over charged with Taxes,
which were employed towards the War, that could at
the best only prove beneficial to Denmark, and their
Commerce being interrupted with the Hanse Towns, it
occasioned great discontents among them; besides this,
the King's Officers had used the swedes very tyrannically,
and the King had upon several occasions receded
from the Articles of Union made at Calmar, especially

when he sent the most antient swedish Records into Denmark,
which at last obliged the swedes to take desperate
Counsels. The first Insurrection was made by the Dalekarls,
who being headed by a certain antient Nobleman
in those parts called Engelbrecht Engelbrechtson, besieged
one of the King's Officers called Josse Erichson, who had
exercised great Tyranny over them, in his Castle, neither
could they be appealed till he was deposed from
his Office, and another put in his place. But this Calm
did not last long, for the Boors being again stirred up by
Engelbrecht over-run all the neighbouring Country, destroying
with Fire and sword, all such as would not
side with them; and being joined by one Erick Pue••,
who headed the Northlanders, they took a great many
strongholds, killing all the Foreigners they met withal,
whose seats they destroyed, and at last forced the senate
of the Kingdom assembled at Wadstena, to renounce
their Allegiance to the King. These intestine Commotions
obliged King Erick to make Peace with the Holst•i••rs
and the Hanse Towns, and to turn all his Forces
against the swedes. But his Fleet being for a great
part destroyed by storms, he arrived with the rest at
stockholm, but not being able to cope with so great a
multitude, as Engelbrocht had raised against him; he
was fain to make a truce with them for twelve Months. 
In the mean while he retired into Denmark. leaving only
a Garrison of 600 Men in the Castle of stockholm. After
his departure Engelbrocht was declared Generalissi••
          over
all the Forces of the Kingdom, who, at last upon the
perswasion of the Archbishop Cluf, agreed to a Treaty
to be set on foot betwixt the King and his subjects,
where it was agreed that the swedes should again acknowledge
him for their King, provided he would
stand to the Union, which the King at that time consented
to, reserving only to his free disposal the three Castles
of stockholm, Calmar and Nycoping, all the rest being to
be committed to the Government of the Natives of
sweedland. Thus things seemed to be restored to the
antient state, but no sooner had the King got the aforesaid
Castles into his possession, but he began to recede,
and having left a Garrison of 500 Men in the Castle of
stockholm, retired upon a sudden into Denmark. King

         Erick having thus left the Kingdom a second time, the
swedish senators, who feared that he might soon return
with a greater Force, being assembled at Arboka, called
together the whole Nobility, and a Burger-Master out
of each City, to consult about the present exigency of
Affairs; but before they could come to any steady resolution,
Engelbrecht by the assistance of some of the
Citizens of stockholm, had made himself Master of that
City, and besieged the King's Lieutenant in the Castle. 
The Treaty being thus broke of, and the flame of Rebellion
rekindled,Charles Cnutson. the Marshal Charles Cnutson was declared
Governour and General of the Kingdom: This
was like to have occasioned great Disturbances, if Engelbrecht,
who pretended to be injured by this Choice,
had not been first appeased with great Promises, and
afterwards murthered by one Benedict suenson, with
whom he had an old quarrel. 1436. But Erick Pu•ke the
chief Companion of Engelbrecht taking up his Friend's
Quarrel against his Murtherers that were protected by
Charles Cnutson, it occasioned great Jealousies betwixt
them. The Castles of stockholm and Calmar being also
in the King's possession, and some of the Chiefest of the
Kingdom grown very jealous of the greatness of the
Marshal, the Treaty was renewed with the King at
Calmar, who came thither in Person, and promised to
put into all Offices and Places of Trust, Natives of
sweden, and having made Benedict suenson Governour of
the Castle of Calmar, appointed an Assembly of the senate
and Nobility to be held in september following
when he would be ready to surrender all the strongholds
into the hands of the Native subjects of sweden,
But in the mean time the King in his Voyage from
Gothland to suderkoping, was overtaken by a violent
Tempest, wherein most of his ships having been lost,
he narrowly escaped drowing. As soon as the swedes
got notice of this Misfortune, not knowing whether the
King was alive or dead, it was resolved that the last
Treaty made at Calmar should remain in Force. Pursuant
to this Decree, the Marshal having partly by great
Promises, partly by Threats, got into the possession of
all the Castles of the Kingdom, seemed to want nothing
to accomplish his Designs, but the Title of a King, where
         •t

         Erick Pueke being vexed to the soul, raised a great
number of Boors against him, who having defeated the
Marshal and his Forces, would quickly have put an
end to his Greatness, if he under pretence of reconciliation
had not invited Erick Pueke to an interview, and
notwithstanding his Faith given, sent him to stockholm,
where he was beheaded. In the mean while, the senators
of the Kingdom having got notice that the King was
alive,1437. appointed an Assembly to be held at Calmar,
where the King was to fulfil the former Treaty; but
the King not coming at the appointed time, Commissioners
were sent into Denmark to treat with him about
the performance of the Agreement made at Calmar,
which he refusing to do, they made an underhand
League with some of the great Men in Denmark against
King Erick. the effects of which he felt soon after. 
Whilest these things were transacting in Denmark, the
Marshal had by his cunning got the whole Power of the
Kingdom into his hands, and obtained from the senate
in sweden, to appoint a certain day for the King to appear
in sweden, and put an end to those Differences that
were then betwixt him and the Estates, and in case of a
refusal, they renounced their Allegiance to him. But
the Archbishop Oluf, and some of the Chief Men of the
Kingdom, that were dissatisfied at the Marshal's proceedings
did so far prevail by their Authority, that a
General Assembly of all the senators of the three Northern
Kingdoms should be held at Calmar, which in
all likelihood might have had better success than before,
if the Archbishop had not been poysoned in his Journey
thither by the Marshal. Notwithstanding this, the rest
of the senators appeared at Calmar, but the King's Commissioners
refusing to acknowledge and to confirm the
Treaty made at Calmar, which the swedes insisted upon,
the whole meeting proved fruitless. In the mean
time King Erick was retired with all his Treasure
out of Denmark into Gothland, and the Danish senators
who as well as the swedes had been dissatisfied with the
King for a considerable time before, agreed with the
swedes to renounce their Allegiance to him, and to
choose one in his stead, that would maintain the Union
betwixt these Kingdoms. The Danes therefore sent

to Christopher Duke of Bavaria,
         Christopher Duke of Bavaria. who being King Erick's
sister's son, had for some time lived in Denmark, desiring
him to accept of that Crown. 1439. As soon as he arrived
in Denmark, Ambassadors were sent to the Marshal
and the other senators of sweden, that were then at
Calmar, to notifie the arrival of the Duke of Bavaria,
and to treat with them to receive him also for their
King, as the only means to maintain the Union and
Peace betwixt those Kingdoms. The Marshal and his
Party were not a little surprised at this Proposition; but
perceiving that, at the Dyet held at Arboga, most of the
Estates were inclined to maintain the Union, and receive
Christopher for their King, they also agreed with
the rest of the Estates, and Christopher was received by
the Marshal and the senators with great Pomp at Calmar,
from whence being conducted to stockholm, and
from thence to Ʋpsal, he was there crowned King of
sweden, and soon after returned into Denmark. After
he had reigned four years, he married Dorothee the
Daughter of John Marquis of Brandenburgh; and King
Erick, who was yet in the possession of Gothland, doing
considerable damage to the swedish ships, he was prevailed
upon by the senate to undertake an Expedition
into Gothland. Whilst every body was in great expectation
about the success of this Enterprise, he upon the
sudden clapt up a Peace with King Erick, leaving him
in the quiet possession of Gothland. 
         1448. He died at Helsinburgh,
in his Journey to Joncoping, whither he had called
together the senate and Nobility of sweden, having
left great Legacies to several Churches in sweden; but
the Danes, who had all his ships, Ammunition, rich
Furniture and ready Money in their hands, would not
pay one groat of it. After the death of K. Christopher,
         Charles Cnutson. the Estates of sweden
that were assembled at stockholm were divided into two
parties, some of them being for deferring the Election of a
new King, till such time as the senators of the 3 kingdoms
could, at a general Assembly chuse a King, according to
the Union agreed upon betwixt them; but the Marshal
and his Party, which was the strongest, were, without
having any respect to the Union, for chusing immediately
a King of their own: this Contest lasted for several

days, and that with such heats that they were
ready to come to blows, till at last the Marshal Charles
Cnutson's Party prevailed, who was chosen King of sweden. 
But the Danes offered the Crown of Denmark to
Adolf Duke of Holstein, and he by reason of his old Age,
having refused to accept of it, they made Christian Earl
of Oldenburg, the Duke's sister's son, their King. 
Charles, at the very beginning of his Reign, besieged
King Erick in the Castle of Wisby, who having deluded
the swedish Generals with a Truce, did, in the mean
while provide himself with all Necessaries, and was at
last relieved by Christian King of Denmark; who sent
him into Pomerania, where, in the City of Rugen, he
ended his days, without making any further pretension
to the Crown. In the mean while the Norwegians, except some of
the Nobility, had made Charles also their King, which
occasioned almost a continual War betwixt him and
Christian king of Denmark, in which King Charles was
pretty successful at first; but after the death of the
brave Thord Bonde, his General, who was barbarously
murthered; King Christian, with the Assistance of the
Archbishop of sweden and several others of the swedish
Nobility, who were Enemies to King Charles, proved
too hard for him: for the Archbishop having surprised
the King's Forces at strengness, besieged him in the City
of stockholm; so that King Charles finding himself reduced
to the utmost Extremity, resolved to embarque
with all his Treasure for Dantzick, where he arrived
safely, after a Voyage of three days, in the tenth year
of his Reign. Christian I. 
          No sooner had King Charles left the
Kingdom,1458. but the Archbishop, having got all the stronholds
of the Kingdom into his hands, sent to Christian
King of Denmark, to invite him into sweden, who being
arrived with a considerable Fleet at stockholm, was,
by the senate and Nobility declared King of sweden, and
crowned at Ʋpsal. He reigned at first with a general
satisfaction of the swedes; but some years after, by his
Cruelty and heavy Impositions laid upon the People, became
odious to them: for he not only caused some of
the Great men, that were falsly accused of holding a
Correspondency with King Charles, to be tortured to

death, but also exercised great Cruelty against a great
number of Boors, that were risen in Arms against him;
and having conceived a jealousie of the Archbishop, he
caused him to be carried Prisoner to Copenhagen. This
so exasperated Katil the Bishop of Lyncoping that he
raised an Insurrection against the King, and forced
him to retire into Denmark: and tho the King returned
the year next following with a considerable Army, yet
being defeated by the Bishop's Forces, he was forced to
leave the Kingdom a second time;1464. and the Bishop having
laid siege to the City and Castle of stockholm, where
King Christian had left a Garrison, sent for assistance to
King Charles, who being glad of this Opportunity, came
with some Forces (which he had gathered in Poland
and Prussia) into sweden, where he was no sooner arrived,
but the City of stockholm was surrendred to him,
and he again received as King of sweden. But this Joy
was of no long continuance; for a difference being arisen
betwixt him and Bishop Katil, about the exchanging
the Archbishop that was Prisoner at Copenhagen,
the said Bishop did underhand agree with King Christian
to restore him to the Kingdom of sweden, under condition
that he should set the Archbishop at liberty. According
to this agreement, a Reconciliation being made
betwixt K Christian and the Archbishop; the latter was
received very splendidly by the Bishop, and was no sooner
arrived in sweden, but having raised some Forces against
King Charles, defeated him in a bloody Battel fought upon
the Ice near stockholm, and forced him to abjure his
Right and Pretension to the Kingdom. After the King's
Resignation, the Archbishop made himself Master of all
the strong-holds of the Kingdom, without any opposition,
except that one Nils sture, a particular Friend of
K. Charles's, traversed sometimes his Designs. This Nils
sture and one Erick Axelson, Governour of Wibourg in Finland,
having at last made a party against him, plaied their
Game so well that Erick Axelson,
         Erick Axelson, who had married King
Charles's Daughter was declared Regent of the Kingdom. 1466. 
But the A. Bish. was obliged to surrender stockholm and
some other strong holds into the Regent's hands. Nevertheless
the hatred betwixt the two exasperated Factions,
headed by Nils sture and Erick Nilson (of which

party was also the Archbishop) continued with great animosity. 
Erick Nilson and his Party, under pretence of
protecting the Archbishop against the Power of King
Charles and his adherents, endeavoured the Restauration
of King Christian, but Nils sture and his Party openly declared,
that they would either have King Charles restored,
or at least maintain the Regent in his station. These two
Parties did not only commit great Insolencies and Murthers,
making great havock all over the Country, but
at last also came to an open War, wherein the Archbishop's
Party being worsted, he died for grief; and the
Common People in hopes to put an end to the miseries
of the Kingdom once more restored Charles to the
Crown. But Erick Nilson, Erick Carlson, T•olle and some others
having again raised some Forces against him,1468. and
surprised his Army during the time of the Truce, again
forced him to seek for shelter in the Dalers, whither being
pursued by Erick Carlson, he with an unequal number
gave him a signal overthrow, forcing him to retire into
Denmark King Charles being soon after returned to stockholm,
(which City and the whole Kingdom he recommended
before his death to steen scure his sister's son) he
there died in the same year, leaving the Kingdom in such
a confusion,1470. that for a twelve month after, there was
a meer Anarchy in sweden, some having declared for
King Christian, some for steen sture to be made Regent
of the Kingdom. At last the Government was committed
to steen sture, who having vanquished King Christian
in a memorable Battel fought near stockholm,
         1471. and forced
him to retire with his broken Forces by sea into Denmark▪
         
got into the possession of the whole Kingdom of
sweden. And tho' King Christian kept the Regent of
sweden in a continual alarm as long as he lived, and several
meetings were held concerning his Restauration,
yet there was no open War betwixt the two Kingdoms,
and steen sture reigned for a considerable time with a
general applause; so that King Christian during his Regency,
never durst return into sweden, but died in Denmark
in the year 1481. After the Death of King Christian,
         1481. the Danes and Norwegians
having made John the son of Christian their

King, the swedes also agreed with King John upon certain
Articles, which the King having confirmed to them
under his seal, he was declared King of sweden. But
the Regent steen sture, notwithstanding this solemn
Transaction remained in the possession of the Kingdom
for fourteen Years after, under pretence that the Danes
had not fulfilled their Promise according to the Articles
of the Treaty, during which time the Kingdom was
miserably afflicted by intestine Divisions, and the
Wars which were carried on against Denmark and Russia. 
The senators therefore of sweden having in vain
endeavoured to perswade steen sture to lay down his
Office, at last deposed him from the Regency, and craved
Assistance from King John,
         John II. 
          who having defeated
steen sture and his Party near stockholm, was by the
senate and the Regent himself received as King of sweden
and his son Christian declared his successor after
his death in that Kingdom. 1497. This King reigned very
peaceably for a while, but after some Years by the perswasions
of some Courtiers, fell into the same Errour
which had been the undoing of his Predecessors: For
under pretence that the Revenues of the Crown were
extreamly diminished, he obliged steen sture and several
others to surrender the Fiefs belonging to the Crown,
which they were in possession of, some of which he bestowed
upon the Danes and Germans. Besides this, his
Governours had committed great Insolencies in their
Provinces, which so exasperated the People, that as soon
as the News of his defeat in Ditmarsen was spread over
sweden, the swedes being headed by steen sture, assembled
at Wadstana, where having renounced their Allegiance,
they bid open defiance to him, alledging that he,
had not fulfilled the Articles of the Treaty made at
Calmar. 
        The King being surprised at this unexspected News
sailed forthwith for Denmark, leaving the Queen with
a good Carrison at stockholm, which City was thereupon
besieged by sture; who being soon after again
constituted Regent of the Kingdom, forced the Castle
of stockholm to a surrender, and got almost all the rest of
the strongholds in sweden into his possession; notwithstanding
which, the Danes burnt Elfsburgh and Oresteen,
         
and committed great Cruelties in West-Gothland, under
the Conduct of Christian King John's son, who had
done the like not long before in Norway, where he had
rooted out almost all the Noble Families. Yet because the
Queen was as yet in sweden, the fury of the Danes was
for a while appeased by the intercession of the Lubeckers
and the Cardinal Raimow, who having procured Liberty
for her to return into Denmark, she was conducted
by the Regent to the Frontiers of swaland. But in his
return to Ioncoping, he died suddenly, and his death having
been kept secret for a while, there was a strong
suspition that he had been poysoned by Mereta the Widow
of Cnut Alfson, thereby to open the way to her
Bridegroom suante sture, to the Regency of the Kingdom. 
As soon as the news of the Regent's death was
spread all over the Kingdom,1503. the Estates convened at
stockholm, where it was disputed for some time, whether
King John should be recalled, or suante Nilson sture
should be made Regent, till the latter having prevailed,
the said sture was made Regent of the Kingdom. 1504. Then
the War was renewed with King John, which was carried
on with various success, both Parties committing
great devastations, without any other remarkable advantage. 
The Danes having at first stirred up the Emperour,
the Pope and the Russians against the swedes,
did considerable mischief, but the Regent having made a
Peace with the Russians, and set the Lubeckers against
Denmark▪
          retook Calmar and Bornholm, and would in
all likelihood have made greater Progresses, if he had
not soon after died at Westekaos, in the eighth year of
his Regency. After the death of this Regent, there
were again great Divisions in the senate about the Election
of a new Regent;1511. the younger sort were for
choosing steen sture the deceased Regent's son:steen sture the younger. 
          But
the Archbishop and Bishops, and the rest of the antient
senators, would have elected Gustavus Trolle an antient
Wise and experienced Man. After several prorogations
and very hot debates,1512. at last steen sture, who was favoured
by the common People, and had most of the
strongholds of the Kingdom in his hands, was declared
Regent, and King John died in the year next following
at Ablburgh in Jutland. 
         1513. After his death, the Danes
         
and Norwegians had declared Christian his son their
King but the swedes who had not forgot his cruelties
formerly committed in West-Gothland desired time to
consider of a thing of such importance. King Christian
finding himself after four years tergiversation deceived
in his hopes, and that the Regent would not part with
his Power by fair means, did not only stir the Pope Leo X. 
up against him, but also brought Gustavus Trolle the new
Arbhbishop by great Presents over to his side, and perswaded
the Russians to make an in-road into Finland. 
steen sture being soon convinced of the Archbishop's sinister
Intentions, had tendered the Oath to him, which
he refusing to take, was besreged by the Regent in his
Castle of stecka. Then it was that the Archbishop called
King Christian to his Assistance, who having taken
some ships loaden with Amunition belonging to the Regent,
and in vain endeavoured to relieve the besieged
Castle, the War was begun on both sides. For the Archbishop
having been forced to surrender the Castle and
his Office, Pope Leo thereupon excommunicated the Regent,
laying a Fine of 100000 Ducats upon the swedes,
and enjoyning the execution thereof to King Christian. 
Pursuant to this Decree, the King of Denmark fell with
a great Army into sweden, and was met by the Regent
and his Forces in West-Gothland, but the Regent having
received a Wound there, of which he died soon after at
strengness, his Army first retreated, and being deprived
of a Leader, afterwards dispersed. King Christian then
having divided his Army, sent one part into West and
East-Gothland, which were soon subdued, and marched
with the rest to strengness. 
         1520. 
        The Archbishop taking hold of this opportunity, reassumed
his Archi-Episcopal Dignity, and being assisted
by two other Bishops and seven of the senators of the
Kingdom did declare Christian King of sweden in the
name of the Estates at Ʋpsal. The King having been
Crowned by the Archbishop Trolle, and received the
City of stockh•lm by surrender into his hands, treated
the swedes at 〈◊〉 with abundance of humanity, but soon
after, found out a Weapon wherewith to destroy his
Adversaries, and this was the business concerning the degradation
of the Archbishop and the ruining of his Castle

of stecka. For tho' the King by an Amnestie had pardoned
all past Offences, yet no satisfaction having been
given to the Pope, the Archbishop in his Name, demanded
a million pounds of silver in reparation of the damages
done to the Church at Ʋpsal, and his Castle of
stecka. And to make up the matter, it was pretended
that Gunpowder had been conveyed into the King's Palace
to blow him up. steen sture's Widow, his Mother
in Law, fifteen others besides the senare and Commonalty
of stockholm, were accused as Actors and Abettors,
who were all condemned as Hereticks, ninety four of
them, all People of Note, being beheaded at stockholm
and their servants hanged up with Boots and spurs. 
The deceased Regent's body having been digged up, was
exposed among the rest of the executed Persons, and
the Quarters set up and down the Country. His Widow
and Mother in Law were forced to purchase their
Lives with the loss of their whole Estate, and were nevertheless
with a great many other Women of Quality
committed to Prison. In Finland, Hemoning Gudde, notwithstanding
his former services done to him, was with
ten more executed by the King's Command, the Abbot
of the Convent at Nydala was with eleven Monks
drowned by his Orders, and two Gentlemen's sons, one
of nine, the other of seven years, beheaded at Joncoping,
and after he had in this manner murthered 600 of his
swedish subjects he returned into Denmark
        § 9. But in the mean while that King Christian was
busied in bringing the swedes under the Danish yoke,
by all manner of inhumane Barbarities,Gustavus I. 
          
         Gustavus
Erichson (whose Father had been beheaded by the Tyrant,
and his Mother thrown in Prison) had sheltered
himself among the Dalek•rls, who being made sensible of
the danger which threatened them and the whole Kingdom,
had made Gustave their Head, whose example
being followed by the Estates of sweden, they soon after
declared him Regent of that Kingdom, except the Archbishop
and his Party, that remained firm to the Danish
Interest. King Christian being violently exasperated at
Gustave, revenged himself upon his Mother and two sisters,
whom he sent from stokholm to Copenhagen, where

they perished in Prison; he issued also out an Order,
that no quarter should be given to any swedish Nobleman,
and committed great Barbarities wherever he
came. The swedes on the other hand, under the Conduct
of their Regent Gustave, repaid the Danes with the same
Coin wherever they met them, and with the Assistance
of the Lubeckers besieged stockholm, which was as yet in
King Christian's Possession, when they received the joyful
news out of Denmark, that the Jutlanders had renounced
their Allegiance to King Christian. 
         1523. This so
encouraged Gustave and his Party, that they did not
only drive King Christian's Forces out of most Provinces
of the Kingdom, retook Ocland and Borkholm, but also
recovered the Castle and City of Calmar, and made Gustave
King of sweden, who thereupon immediately summoned
stockholm to a surrender, and the Garrison being
without hopes of relief, surrendred the City and Castle
to the Lubeckers, who restored the same to King Gustave. 
In the mean while King Christian was retired with his
Queen into the Netherlands, and the Jutlanders having
made Frederick I. King Christian's Uncle, their King,
would fain have perswaded the swedes to follow their
example, but these being not ambitious of continuing
the Union with Denmark, had refused their proffer, and
chosen Gustave their King. But King Gustave finding
the Treasury mightily exhausted by these long intestine
Wars, he not only taxed the Clergy to pay considerable
sums towards the payment of his souldiers, but also
made bold with the superfluous Ornaments of the
Churches, against which, Brask the Bishop of Lincoping
having protested and made complaint thereof to Johannes
Magnus the Pope's Legate, Peter Bishop of Westeraas
endeavoured to raise an Insurrection among the Dalekerls. 
        But whilest these Bishops were employed in maintaining
their Privileges, the Protestant Religion had
begun to spread all over the Kingdom. The same was
by some Merchants and German souldiers first introduced
into sweden, and some swedish students, that had
studied at Wittenbergh, had brought along with them
into their Native Country, both the Doctrine and
Writings of Luther. Among these one Olaus Petri was

the chiefest, who having been an Auditor of Luther, at his
return into sweden was made a Canon and Protonotary
to the Bishops of strenguess: this Man after the death of
the Bishop, having brought Lars Anderson the Archdeacon
over to his Opinion, began not only to defend
Luther's Doctrine publickly in the schools, but also
to publish the same from the Pulpit. The Bishop
being absent, Dr. Nils Dean of that Chapter, with all
his might opposed this new Doctrine, which being come
to the King's Ears, he advised with Lars Anderson, who
having instructed him in the chief Points of it,Reformation begun in sweden. 
          and in
what manner a great many German Princes had taken
away the superfluous riches of the Clergy, began to
hearken to his Opinion, resolving nevertheless to go on
cautiously in this business, and to see how some Princes
in Germany should proceed in this Affair, as also how
the Bishops in sweden would relish this Doctrine. In
the mean while Pope Hadrian IV. had sent his Legate
into sweden to endeavour the extirpation of this Heresie,
and the Clergy of sweden grew every day more
refractory, refusing to pay the Taxes imposed upon
them, as being contrary to their Privileges. On the
other hand, Olaus Petri being encouraged by the King,
was not silent, but defended his Cause both by Dispute
and Writing, with such success, that the King not only
constituted him Minister in the great Church of stockholm,
and put into other vacant Church-Benefices, such
Ministers as had studied at Wittenbergh, but also constituted
over the Dominicans and Black Fryars, such Priors
as he knew to be faithful to him, and such of them
as were Foreigners he banished the Kingdom, and told
unfeignedly to Bishop Brask▪
          that he could not deny Protection
to the Lutherans, as long as they were not convinced
of any Crime or Errour. But all this while one soren Norby, who still adhered
to King Christian, had Gothland in his Possession, and
did considerable damage to the swedes in their Trade;
against him King Gustavus having sent Bernhard van
Melan with some Forces to reduce the said Island, and
Norby finding himself too weak put himself and the
Island under the Protection of Denmark, which occasiaoned
some differences between these two Northern Kings▪
         
who had been very good Friends ever before. About
this time Olaus Petri was publickly married in the great
Church at stockholm, and the King had not only demanded
the Tenths of the Clergy towards the maintenance
of his Forces, but also Quartered some of his
Horse in the Monasteries, which so incensed Bishop
Brask, that he forbid in his whole Diocess so much as
to name the Doctrine of Luther. But the King having
understood that Olaus Petri was busie in Translating the
New Testament into the swedish Tongue,First Translation of the New Testament into swedish. 
          commanded
the Archbishop, to take care that the Roman Catholicks
also should make a Translation, which though it •elished
very ill with the Bishops, yet were they fain to comply
with the King's command, who, to mortifie them the
more, also ordered a Disputation to be held at Ʋpsal betwixt
Dr. Pieter Galle and Olaus Petri, concerning the
chiefest Points in question betwixt the Roman Catholicks
and Lutherans, where Olaus Petri had much the
better, and his Translation was approved of before the
others, which had been patched up by so many Translators. 
In the mean time the Danish Clergy had given
a considerable subsidy to their King to be employed
against King Christian, wherefore King Gustave, taking
hold of this opportunity, demanded a considerable supply
from the swedish Clergy, but these objecting that it
was against their Privileges and Rights, the King ordered
the same to be examined in another Dispute betwixt
Olaus Petri, and Dr. Pieter Galle, and because
they were not able to prove their Title out of the Holy
scripture, the King concluded them to be dependent on
his pleasure, and at the Dyet held at Westeraos not only
demanded a supply from the Clergy, but also proposed
that the superfluous Bells should be taken out of the
Churches, and be employed towards the payment of
the Debt due to the Lubeckers. And because the Archbishop
grew more troublesome every day, the King first
took him into Custody, and afterwards sent him Ambassadour
into Poland, from whence he never returned into
sweden. He also commanded another Disputation to
be held concerning the chief Points in question betwixt
the Lutherans and Roman Catholicks, which however
met with great opposition from Bishop Brask, and the

rest of the Roman Catholick Clergy, who set up a Country
Fellow, against Gustave. This Fellow pretended to
be the son of steen sture (notwithstanding he was dead
a twelve month before) and having got a party among
the Dalekerls, and being upheld by Bishop Brask and
the Bishop of Druntheim in Norway,
         1527. and encouraged in
his undertaking by King Frederick of Denmark, laid
open claim to the Crown, threatning all the Lutherans
and especially the City of stockholm with Fire and
sword, which was the most forward in settling the
Protestant Religion. About the same time the Emperour had besieged
Pope Clement VII. in the Castle of st. Angelo, wherefore
King Gustave taking hold of this Juncture, appointed
a Dyet to be held at Westeraos, where in his
Declaration he professed; that the Roman Catholick
Clergy had made it their business to charge him with
making Innovation in Religion for no other reason, but
that he would not let them domineer over the Laymen,
and had forced them to submit to the Civil Power, and
to give part of their superfluous Riches, some of which
they had got by fraud, towards easing the Common People
of those burthensome Taxes (which he hitherto had been
forced to impose upon them. ) And that for the same Reason
the Emperour himself had been forced lately to teach
the Pope his duty. The same thing was proposed by the
King to the whole Dyet, where he told them; that the
superfluous Revenues of the Clergy ought to be annexed
to the Crown, and especially such Lands as since
the year 1454 had been given to the Clergy, should
be restored to the right Heirs, promising withal that
the Common People should be for the future eased of
their Taxes; in case they would give their consent to
the reduction of the Revenues of the Clergy. And the
better to get the consent of the Temporal Lords and
senators he made a great Banquet, where he gave the
next place to himself to these senators, whereas the same
had belonged formerly to the Bishops, who now were
forced to be contented with the next place after them,
the third place was given to the rest of the Nobility,
the fourth to the inferiour Clergy, the fifth to the Citizens,
the sixth to the Boors; which so exasperated the

Clergy that they assembled in the Church of st. Egidius,
and secretly took a resolution among themselves not to
obey the King in this Point, not to surrender any of
their Revenues, or to recede from their antient Religion. 
And Bishop Brask freely told the King, that the
Clergy of the Kingdom had such a strict dependency on
the Pope, that without his consent they could not do any
thing whatsoever. Which as it met with great approbation
from all the rest of the Clergy, and from some
of the Temporal Estates, so the King was so incensed
thereat, that he immediately rose from his seat, and
told the Estates that he was ready to Abdicate the Kingdom,
if they would repay him his Charges and Monies
which he had laid out for that use, and to show them
that he was in earnest, retired for several days with some
of his chief Officers into the Castle. The Estates being
much surprised at the King's resolution, especially
when they saw the Citizens of stockholm to be stedfast
to the King, and that Dr. Peter Galle was worsted by
Olaus Petri in a late Disputation, thought it their best
way to beg the King's pardon and to intreat him not to
resign the Crown. Upon their reiterated request the
King having been at last prevailed upon to come out of
the Castle, demanded from several Bishops to surrender
into his hands their Castles, and to subscribe a Decree
made at this Dyet, concerning the regulating of
the Clergy, which they were fain to comply withal. As
soon as the Dyet was ended he took not only from the
Monasteries such Lands as had been given to them
since the year 1454. Church Lands reduced in sweden. 
          but also several other Church Lands
and precious moveables, all which he annexed to the
Crown. In the mean while the Bishops and their party
were not idle, but were contriving all manner of
mischief against the King, though with small success. 
For the Dalekerls, who had made an Insurrection, were
frightened by the King to comply with his commands,
and to send away their Leader, the supposititious s•ure;
and sigismund King of Poland, unto whom the dissatisfied
party had proffered the Crown, did not think fit
to accept of it; so that Bishop Brask, despairing at last
of the Roman Catholick Cause, under pretence of a
Journey retired to Dantzick. 
        
The King having surmounted all these difficulties,
thought convenient not to defer any longer his Coronation,1528. 
which having been solemnized at Ʋpsal with the
usual solemnity: he summoned the Rebellious Dalekerls
to appear before him at Thuana, threatning them
with Fire and sword if they did not appear at the appointed
time; The Rebels being throughly frightened
by the King's severity appeared without Arms at the appointed
place, where he caused several of the Ringleaders
to be Executed, and dismissed the rest, after having
promised to be obedient for the future. In Helsingland
he appeased the tumultuous multitude with threats,
and fined their Leaders, and having called together a
synod of the Clergy at Orebro, where the King's Chancellour
was President, the chiefest Points of the Popish
Doctrine were there abolished, and in their stead the
Protestant Religion introduced, where it was also ordered,
that a Protestant Professor of Divinity should be
Constituted in each Cathedral. This wrought in a manner
Miracles among the Inferiour Clergy and Monks,The Protestant Religion Established in sweden. 
         
who left their Monasteries, were married, and became
Ministers in the Protestant Churches. But the Bishops
and their party entred into an Association with some of
the dissatisfied Lords in West Gothland, who accused the
King of Heresie and other Crimes, renouncing their Allegiance
to him. These were Headed by Thuro Johanson
the Rix Marshal, who raised an Insurrection among
the Dalekerls, and endeavoured also to stir up the West
and East Gothes, whom he persuaded to make Magnus
Brynteson, a Man in great Authority among them, their
King. But the King having again appeased this tumult
by granting his Pardon to them, Magnus the Bishop of
skara and Thuro Johnson fled into Denmark, but Magnus
Bayteson, Nils Olofson and Thuro Erickson having been
Convicted of High Treason at the Dyet held at str•ngness,
the two first were Executed, and the third paid a
considerable Fine. The King then, to settle the minds
of his subjects having renewed his Pardon, caused the
superfluous Bells to be taken out of the steeples, the
same being granted to him by the Estates towards the
payment of a Debt due to the Lubeckers. Which
proved a new subject for an Insurrection; for the Dalekerls
         
not only seised upon some of these Bells, but also
pretended to hold an Assembly at Arboga, to consult about
the Deposing of King Gustave, which obliged the
King to call together the Estates at Ʋpsal, whither he
came in person with a good Army, and meeting with
great opposition from the mutinous People, ordered his
soldiers to fire among them, which so terrified them
that upon their Knees they begged his Pardon, promising
to be more Obedient for the future. Things
being thus pretty well settled the King married Catharine
the Daughter of Magnus Duke of saxen Lauenburgh,
and having received intelligence that King Christian
was landed in Norway with a considerable Force,
he sent some Troops under the Command of Lars sigeson
the Rix Marshal to the Frontiers of Norway, who
having been joined by some Danes, forced King Christian
to raise the siege of Banus,
         1533. who at last surrendring
himself to the Danes, was by Frederick King of Denmark,
committed to Prison, where he died after twenty
seven years imprisonment. But no sooner was this storm
over, but the Lubeckers raised another against sweden. 
For, they having demanded from the King, to grant
them the whole Trade on his Northern sea Coasts,
which he refused to consent to, peremptorily demanded
their Debt, and having joyned with a great many Refugies
of King Christian's party, and made John Earl
of Hoya, who had married King Gustave's sister, their
Head, did propose to themselves no less than the Conquest
of the Northern Kingdoms, having inticed some
Citizens of stockholm under pretext of making that City
a free Hanse Town, to lay violent hands on the King:
And after the death of Frederick King of Denmark,
when that Kingdom was divided into several Factions
persuaded the senate of Copenhagen and Malmoe to enter
into the Confederacy of the Hanse Towns. Being
thus strengthened by a considerable party within that
Kingdom they had great success against the Danes, till
these having declared Christian III. their King, and
being assisted with Mony, ships, and Forces by King
Gustave beat the Lubeckers near He•sinburgh, and afterwards
in a sea-Fight defeated their whole Fleet, and
carried a great many of their ships into Denmark, soon

after King Gustave to strengthen himself the better at
Home, married Margaret the Daughter of Abraham
Erickson, Governor of West Gothland, which Alliance
stood afterwards his son Duke John in great stead against
King Erick. King Gustave having also conceived
a jealousie against the Emperour Charles V. whom he
suspected to be for making Palls Grave Frederick, son
in Law of the imprisoned King Christian, King over
the Northern Kingdoms, took a resolution to strengthen
himself with the Alliance of France. To put this design
in execution he sent his secretary into France, who
having first made a Treaty of Commerce betwixt these
two Crowns, did also afterwards conclude a defensive
Alliance betwixt them. Gustave having thus settled his Affairs called a Dyet
to be held at Westeraas,
         1542. where the Estates of the Kingdom
declared the succession Hereditary for the future,1544. 
Constituting Erick Gustaveson,
         The Kingdom of sweden made Hereditary, and the Popish Religion abolished. who was then but eleven
years old, his Father's successor. At the same Dyet the
Popish Religion was quite abolished, and the Lutheran
Religion Established in sweden, the King and the Estates
having obliged themselves by a solemn Oath to
maintain the same with all their power. In the year
1551. King Gustave, after the death of his Queen
Margaret, married Catharine the Daughter of Gustave
Olufson, and ruled the Kingdom of sweden with great
Tranquility, except that the Russians had faln into Livonia
and Finland, with whom having made a Peace,
and being now grown very old he by his Testament
gave to John his second son the Dukedom of Finland,
to the third son Magnus the Dukedom of East Gothland,
and to Charles,
         1556. the youngest of all, the Dukedom of
sudermanland, Nericke and Wermeland, which Countries
they were to hold in Fief from the Crown. But
his eldest son Erick, who was •o succeed him in the
Kingdom, having been persuaded by his Tutor, Dionysius
Burraeus a Frenchman to make his Addresses to
Elizabeth Queen of England, thereby to strengthen his
Interest against his Brothers, sent the said Dionysius into
England, who having writ to his Master that nothing
was wanting to make up the Match but his presence,
the Prince would have gone forthwith into England, if

his Father had not opposed it, who sent in his stead his
second son John, and steen sture. These being very
civilly entertained by Queen Elizabeth, at their return
Home told the Prince that they believed nothing to be
wanting to compleat the Marriage but his presence,
which was very joyfully received by the Prince. But
the old and wise King, who soon perceived, that they
had mistaken Complements for Realities, thought it
advisable to Communicate the business with the Estates
Assembled at stockholm, who after having confirmed
the former Hereditary Union and the King's Testament,
at last gave their consent to this Marriage, granting
a considerable supply towards the defraying of the
charges of this Marriage. But whilst the Prince was
preparing for his Voyage, part of his Baggage having
been sent before, he being near ready to follow in person,
King Gustave dyed at stockholm,
         1559. and King Erick,
not thinking it advisable to trust his Brother with the
Kingdom, was forced to put by his Journey into
England. 
        § 10. Eri•k XIV. 
          King Erick was twenty seven years of age
when he succeeded his Father in the Kingdom. His
first business was to prescribe certain new Articles to
his Brothers, thereby to maintain the Royal Authority
against them, which though sorely against their
will, they were forced to subscribe at the Dyet held
at Arboga. 
         1561. At his Coronation he first introduced the
Titles of Earls and Barons into sweden,
         The Titles of Earls and Barons introduced. alledging that
in an Hereditary Kingdom there ought to be also Hereditary
Dignities among the Nobility. At his very
first Accession to the Crown he was engaged in the
Troubles, which then sorely afflicted the Li•landers. 
For some of them having put themselves under the Protection
of Denmark, some under the Crown of Poland,
those of Reval and the Nobility of Esthenland, that
were nearest to sweden, sought for Protection to King
Erick Whereupon the King having sent an Army under
the Command of Claes Horn (who was joyfully received
at Reval) took them into his Protection, and confirmed
to the City and Nobility their former Privileges. 
As soon as the Poles heard of the arrival of the swedish
         
Army at Reval, they sent an Ambassadour to demand
Reval from the swedes, who having received no other
answer, but that the swedes had at least as good a
Title to Reval, as the Poles, returned Home again, and
the swedish Garrison that was besieged by the •olish
Forces in Reval, forced them to quit that Enterprise. 
soon after, the King being fully resolved to pursue his
intentions concerning the Marriage with Queen Elizabeth
of England, Embarked at Elshorgth to go thither in
person, but was by a violent Tempest forced to return. 
As he was very inconstant in his Temper, and very superstitious,
being much addicted to Astrology, so after
this misfortune he laid aside the thoughts of this Marriage
for a while, making his Addresses by his Ambassadours,
and with great Presents, to Mary Queen scotland, and
the Princess of Lorain both at one time, and not long
after to Katharine the Daughter of the Landgrave of
Hessen, but succeeded in neither. In the mean while
his Borther John had married Katharine Daughter of
sigismund King of Poland, which having been done
without Ring Erick's good liking, who was both mistrustful
of the Poles and his Brother, put him into such
a rage, that he besieged his Brother in the Castle of
Aboa, which having been taken by strategem, he caused
him to be sentenced to death, which sentence he however
changed into a perpetual Imprisonment for that time,
but seemed to repent of it afterwards, when the Russians
demanded the said Katharine, his Brother's Wife▪
in Marriage for their Great Duke. The Poles to revenge
this Affront, stirred up the Danes and Lubeckers against
the swedes, and the Danes having affronted the swedish
Ambassadours at Copenhagen, preparations were made on
all sides, which soon broke out into a War, wherein
the swedes routed the Danes and Lubeckers in several
sea Engagements, but also lost their Admiral (which
ship carried two hundred Brass Guns) and by Land
there was great havock made on both sides, with almost
equal Fortune, except that the swedes had pretty
good success in Livonia. But whilst King Erick was
engaged in War with all his Neighbours round about
him, the inward discontents began to increase more and
more among his subjects by the ill management which

he had shown both in his Affairs and Amours, being
surrounded with a seraglio of Mistrisses, (among whom
one Katharine, an ordinary Country Wench had the
greatest sway over him, whom he also married afterwards,
whereby he lost his Authority among the Nobility. )
Besides this, he was guided in most concerns of
moment by one Joran •erson his Favourite, and his
former Tutor Dionysius Beuraeus, who fomented a continual
jealousie betwixt him and the Family of the
stures, which at last broke out into a fatal revenge. For
there having been Witnesses suborned against suarte
sture and his son Erick, they were with several others of
that Family not only committed to Prison, and miserably
murthered there by the King's command, but he also
with his own hands stabed Nils sture, and repenting soon
after of so barbarous a Fact caused his former Tutor
Dionysius, who advised it, to be slain by his Guards. A great part of the Kingdom, having been put into
confusion by these enormous cruelties, of which the
King feared the consequences, he thought it his best
way, to prevent further inconveniencies, to set his Brother
John at Liberty under certain conditions, and to
lay the blame of these barbarities upon Joran Peerson
his Favourite, who having been committed to Prison the
Intestine Commotions seemed to be appeased for the present. 
But the King having not long after been very succesful
in several Engagements against the Danes, whom he
beat quite out of Denmark he soon after released his Favourite,
and not only declared him free from any imputation,
but also justified the death of those Lords formerly
murthered at Ʋpsal. By his advise also he would
have taken from his Brothers those Provinces which
were allotted them by their Father's Testament, in exchange
of which he proffered them some Possessions in
Livonia. But the Brothers having refused this proffer,
he again resolved to make away his Brother John at the
Nuptials which were to be celebrated at stockholm betwixt
his Mistress Catharine and himself, and to give his
Widow in Marriage to the Grand Duke of Russia. 
But the Brothers having been advertised of the King's
sinister intentions, did not appear at the Wedding, and
having made an Association with several of the Nobility,

that were Kindred of the Lords murthered at
Ʋpsal, they resolved to dethrone King Erick. The better
to execute their intentions, they had by the intercession
of the King of Poland procured a Truce with
Denmark, and having gathered what Forces and
Mony they could among ••eir Friends, and brought
over some German Forces, that were in King Erick's
service to their side, as also engaged Charles, King Erick's
Brother, to join in the Confederacy, they seised upon
the Castles of stockeburgh, Lackoe and Wadstena, in
the last of which they found a great Treasure. Then
they published their Reasons for taking up Arms against
the King and his evil Counsellours, and marched directly
with their Forces towards stockholm, near which
place having fixed their Tents, they attacked the City
on the side of the Brunckehill; King Erick on the other
side defended himself valiantly for a while, and by
frequent sallies did great mischief, and being mistrustful
of the Citizens of stockholm, he sent a Messenger into
Denmark, to crave assistance from King Frederick; but
this Messenger having been taken and killed by the way
the senate of that City, who despaired to hold out
much longer against the Dukes Forces, and also were
favourers of their party, would have persuaded the
King to a surrendry; which proposition having been
rejected by the King, they whilst the King was at
Church opened the Gates to his Enemies, so that he
narrowly escaped into the Castle. The Dukes Forces
laid then close siege to the Castle, so that King Erick,
having first received Hostages, was forced to come out,
and after having resigned the Crown to surrender himself
a Prisoner to his Brother Duke Charles. The Estates then
assembled at stockholm having also jointly renounced
their Obedience to him, he was made a close Prisoner,
and committed to the care of some of the Friends of the
murthered Lords, who used him most barbarously. § 11. John III. 
          After the Deposition of King Erick, John, was
by the Estates then assembled at stockholm proclaimed
King of sweden,
         1568. who having caused some of those that
had been instrumental in the Murther of the Lords at
Ʋpsal, to be Executed, sent his Ambassadour to Roeshild
         
to treat with the King of Denmark either concerning
a Peace or at least the prolongation of the Truce; But
these Ambassadours having exceeded their Commission,
and agreed to such articles as were very prejudicial to
sweden the whole Transaction was declared void at the
next Dyer, and King John sent other Ambassadours to
desire more moderate propositions of Peace from the
King of Denmark. And to give some sort of satisfaction
to his Brother Charles, unto whom he had formerly promised
a share in the Government, he put him in the
Possession of sudermannia, Nericke and Wermeland,
which Provinces were granted him before pursuant to
his Father's Testament. Then he was Crowned at
Ʋpsal, and having sent back the Russian Ambassadours,
he sent also some of his own into Moscovy to prolong
the Truce betwixt them, but no sooner were they arrived
there, but the Moscovites took them into custody,
and perceiving that the Liflanders would in no ways
submit themselves under their Yoak, they found out this
expedient to put Magnus Duke of Holstein into the
Possession of that Country, with the Title of an Hereditary
King, paying only some small acknowlegement
to the Grand Duke of Moscovy. This Proposition
having been approved of by the King of Denmark Duke
of Holstein, and all the Liflanders in general who were
very willing to live under the jurisdiction of a German
Prince. The Moscovites to put their design in execution
advanced with a great Army, which obliged King
John to make Peace with the Danes, at stetin, upon
very disadvantageous terms. But whilst the Moscovites
had employed all their Forces in Livonia and Finland,
the Tartars being set on by the Poles, fell into Moscovy,
and having taken and burnt the City of Moscovy, cut
above thirty thousand of the Inhabitants to pieces. 
This misfortune proved a main obstacle to their design
upon Livonia,
         1571. yet having made a Truce with the Tartars
and Poles for some years they again entred Livonia
with 80000 Men, and committed most inhuman
barbarities, which the swedes, who were much inferiour
in number, could not prevent at that time. But a
swedish party of 600 Horse and 100 Foot,War with the Moscovites. 
          that were
faln in with the Moscovites, having routed 16000 Moscovites,
         
killing 7000 of them upon the spot, the Czar
of Moscovy was so dismayed that he of his own accord
offered a Treaty of Peace to be set on Foot at Newgarten,
which place being disliked by King John, the War
began a fresh, which was carried on but with very indifferent
success on the swedish side, they having been
repulsed before Wefenbergh and Telsburgh. There happened
also another misfortune in the swedish Camp,
which proved not a little prejudicial to their Affairs;
for the German Horse and scotish Foot that were in
their service came to handy blows, upon some distaste taken
against one another, wherein 1500 scotish Foot were
all cut to pieces by the Germans, except 80 that escaped
their fury, and the Russians not long after surprised the
swedes and Germans, that were drunk in their Camp (and
killed a great many of them upon the spot; and because
the swedes were also not idle on their side, but made
frequent inrodes into the Russian Territories, a Truce
was concluded betwixt them for two years. Most of
the swedes are of opinion that King John might have
prosecuted this War, with more vigour if he had not
been more intent upon a Religious design, than upon
warlike preparations. The business proceeded thus: King John, though he
was Educated a Protestant, yet having been very conversant
with a great many learned Roman Catholicks,
and influenced by his Queen, had resolved to restore
by degrees the Roman Catholic Religion, under pretence
of making a Reformation in the lately introduced
Protestant Religion. To effect this, he intended to follow
the footsteps of Georgius Cassander, that was employed
by the Emperours Ferdinand I. and Maximilian
II. to unite and compose the Religious differences
in Germany, and having called in some Jesuits disguised
in Laymens Habits to be assisting to his secretary
Mr. Pieter Fretenius, who was to be the chief manager
of the business, he at the Convocation of some of the
Bishops and Clergy at stockholm proposed to them a new
form of a Liturgy, wherein a great many of the Popish
Ceremonies were to be used in the Administration of the
sacraments, and Consecration of Bishops and Priests,
as also the Mass was again introduced; which new

Liturgy he got subscribed by the new Consecrated Bishops
and some of the inferiour Clergy, and was called
the Liturgy of the swedish Church, conform to the
Catholick and Orthodox Church. This Liturgy having
been published under the new Archbishop's name in the
swedish and Latin Tongues, the Mass and other Roman
Catholick Hymns were again sung in the swedish
Churches (except in the Territories belonging to Duke
Charles the King's Brother) and the Celibacy of Priests
and other Popish Doctrines mightily extolled in the
Pulpits by these disguised Roman Catholicks. The next
thing to be done was to try whether he could bring over
his Brother Charles to his party whom he sollicited by
his Delegates to introduce the Liturgy into his Territories,
who having made answer that it was, (according
to their Father's Testament) neither in his, nor in the
King's power to make any Innovation in Religion, this
proved the subject of a great misunderstanding betwixt
them. Next the King had his recourse to the Pope,
who also having disapproved his undertaking, he demanded
from the Clergy at stockholm to give their approbation
of the said Liturgy, but these answered that
thereby a door was opened for the Roman Catholick
Religion to be re-established in sweden, and having made
their Appeal to a General synod of that Clergy in the
Kingdom, a Convocation of the Clergy of the Kingdom
(except those in the Duke's Territories) was held
by the King's Authority,1577. where the King's party prevailed,New Liturgy introduced. 
so, that the Liturgy was confirmed not only by
the said Clergy, but also by the Temporal Estates, who
declared all such Traitors as should for the future oppose
the same. The King having gained this point
banished and imprisoned some of those, that would not
conform to the said Liturgy, notwithstanding which a
great many of the Clergy that were professed Enemies
of the said Liturgy, and upheld by Duke Charles did
not only boldly discover the deceitful snares of the adverse
party, but also sent to the German Universities of
Wittembergh, Leipzick, Helmstad, Francfut and others,
where their Zeal for the Augsburg Confession was approved,
and the said Liturgy condemned as dangerous
to the Protestant Religion. Hitherto King Erick had

suffered a very hard imprisonment during the space of
nine years, but he having in the mean while by several
ways endeavoured his delivery, and King John now fearing,
that perhaps these Intestine Divisions might furnish
him with an opportunity to make his escape, he sent his
secretary to give him his last Dose, which he did accordingly,
having poisoned him in a Pease soop. The
King being rid of this danger began now to act more
barefaced than before; for now the Invocation of saints
was publickly taught in the Pulpits, those that contradicted
it were imprisoned, a new University of Papists
was to be erected at stockholm, he sent his Ambassadour
to reside at Rome, and the Pope had his Nuncio at
stockholm, and to compleat the matter, a great many
young scholars were sent to the Jesuits abroad, to be
duely instructed in their Principles. In the mean while
the War betwixt the swedes and Moscovites was carried
on without any remarkable advantage on either side, till
it was agreed betwixt the two Kings of Poland and
sweden, that each of them should act separately against
the Moscovites, and what either of them could gain by
his sword, should remain in his possession. Then it
was that stephen King of Poland having attacked the
Moscovites vigorously on his side, the swedes also under
the Command of Pontus de la Gordie took from the
Moscovites the strong Forthress of Kekholm, the Castle of
Padis, Wesenburgh, Telsburgh, Narva, (where 7000
Moscovites were killed) Jawmagrod and other places of
note, which raised such a jealousie in the Poles that
they not only made a separate Peach with the Moscovites,
         1582. 
but also demanded several of those places, taken
from the Moscovites by the swedes, for their share,
which put a great stop to the swedish progresses, and
occasioned a Truce of two years (which was afterwards
prolonged for four years longer) betwixt them
and the Moscovites. Whilst these things were transacting
the misunderstanding betwixt the King and his
Brother Charles could not be removed, notwithstanding
that the Duke had shown his inclination of having these
Differences composed, but the King having called together
a Dyet at Wadstena, sent a summons to the Duke
to appear there in person. The Duke on the other hand,

who did not altogether trust the King, having assembled
some Forces in his Territories, did not appear at the
said Dyet, but lodged himself in some of the adjacent
Villages, were at last by the mediation of some of the
senators, the Brothers were reconciled, the Duke having
begged the King's pardon,1587. and referred the Differences
concerning the Liturgy to the decision of his Clergy,
who at an Assembly held at strengness rejected the aforesaid
Liturgy. In the mean while died stephen King of
Poland, and his Widow Ar••a being Aunt of Prince sigismund
the son of King John, she prevailed with some
of the great Men in Poland to make him their King,
which was done accordingly, tho' not without great difficulty
on the swedish side, who could not for a great
while agree to the several Propositions made to them by
the Poles, and King sigismund himself seemed soon after
to repent of it. As soon as sigismund had left sweden,
his Father King John began to renew his Care for establishing
the new Liturgy in the Duke's Territories;
but the Clergy there trusting upon the Duke's Authority
and Protection, remaining stedfast in their Opinion; the
King at last being tired out by their constancy, sent for
his Brother Charles to stockholm, where a hearty reconciliation
being made betwixt them, Charles was so dear
to him ever after, that he did nothing without his Advice
or Consent, which Friendship continued betwixt the
two Brothers till a little before the King's death, when
Charles having married Cloristina the Daughter of Adolph
Duke of Holstein, the former jealousy was renewed in
some measure in the King, which soon ceased by his
death,1592. which happened a few Months after at stockholm. 
        § 12. After King John's death had been kept secret
for two days, the same having been notified to Duke
Charles, he forthwith came to stockholm, and having sent
a Messenger to King sigismund in Poland,
         sigismund. he in the mean
while took upon him the Administration of the Government
with the Consent of the senate, which was confirmed
to him by King sigismund for that time. soon
after, he called together the swedish and Gothick Clergy
at Ʋpsat (the Finns refusing to appear) where the Augsburgh
         
Confession was confirmed, and the Liturgy, as also
Popish Ceremonies newly introduced quite abolished. 
This Decree having been approved of by the rest of the
Estates, they also made another, wherein was declared,
That no body should appeal out of sweden to the King
in Poland, and that the King should subscribe these Decrees
before his Coronation. This proved the subject
of great broils afterwards, for the King having understood
what had passed at Ʋpsal, he declared, that he
being a hereditary Prince in sweden, would not oblige
himself to any thing before his Coronation, and as to
the Decrees made at Ʋpsal, he declared them void,
which the Estates looked upon as an ill Omen for the
Protestant Religion in sweden. Their jealousie was also
not a little augmented when they saw King sigismund
come into sweden accompanied by the Pope's Nuncio,
by whose advice the King demanded a Church for the
Roman Catholicks in each City, that the new Archbishop
should be deposed, and that he would be Crowned
by the Pope's Nuncio which obliged the Estates to
send their Deputies to Duke Charles, to desire him to interpose
his Authority with the King. Charles therefore
having in conjunction with the Estates, in vain endeavoured
to perswade the King to a compliance with the
Estates, entred into an Association with them for the
defence of the Protestant Religion, and mustered his
Troops near Ʋpsal. The King perceiving them to be
in earnest, thought it his best way not to let things run
to extremity, but having consented to most of their
Propositions, which he surrendred to them the same
morning when he was to be crowned, the Coronation
was performed by the Bishop of strengness. But no sooner
was he returned to stockholm,
         1594. but he took a resolution
quite contrary to his Promise, with an intention to obtain
by force what he could not get by fair means. 
Wherefore having sent for some Forces out of Poland, he
hoped to terrifie the Estates into a compliance at the
next Dyet, but these being backed by Duke Charles, and
having raised the Delekerls, remained stedfast in their
Resolution. The King seeing himself disappointed again
in his Design, resolved upon the advice of the Poles, to
leave the Kingdom and the Government in an unsettled

Condition, hoping thereby to oblige them to be more
pliable for the future. But as soon as the senators understood
that he was sailed towards Dantzick, they in
conjunction with Duke Charles, took upon themselves
the administration of the Government, deposed the King's
Governour of stockholm (he being a Papi•t) and forbid
the exercise of the Romish Religion. And soon
after, a Peace having been concluded with the Muscovites,
a Dyet was held at sudercoping, where after the Estates
had justified their proceeding in a Letter to the King, the
Augsburgh Confession was again confirmed, the Popish
Religion abolished, and all swedes that adhered to the
same, declared incapable of any Employments in the
Kingdom, and several other Decrees were made against
the Papists, and for the maintaining of the Privileges of
the subjects. Then they constituted Duke Charles Regent
of the Kingdom to govern the same with Advice of
the senate, and the whole Transaction was published
in the Latin, swedish and German Tongues. This having
occasioned a general flight among the Roman
Catholicks out of sweden; King sigismund was so
dissatisfied thereat, that he quickly sent some Commissioners
out of Poland to disswade the Duke from these
proceedings, but also when this proved ineffectual by his
Letter to the Estates he committed the whole management
of Affairs to the senate, excluding the Duke from the
Regency. In the mean while some senators either to
curry favour with the King, or upon some distaste taken
against Duke Charles, had shewn themselves great Favourers
of the King, and declined to appear at the Dyet,
which was appointed to be held under the Duke's Authority
at Arboga. Notwithstanding which, the few senators
and the Estates there present did again confirm the Decrees
lately made at Ʋpsal and sudercoping, declaring
Duke Carles sole Regent of sweden. But Niclaco Flemming
the King's General, being in Arms, and having
lately killed a great number of the Boors, the Duke also
thought it not fit to fit still, but having gathered what
Troops he could, possessed himself first of Gothland, and
not long after of the whole Kingdom of sweden, the
King's Governours and those of the senators, that
had not appeared at the last Dyet held at Arboga, flying

in great numbers to the King in Poland. King sigismund
then perceiving that his presence was absolutely necessary
in sweden, resolved to go thither in Person with 6000 Men,
which the Duke having been advertised of,1598. called together
the Estates of the Gothick Kingdom at Wadstena,
and having made known to them the King's intention,
it was unanimously resolved to meet the King with an
Army near Calmar. But the West-Goths and smalanders
having taken up Arms for the King, and the Finns
equipped some ships for this service, the former were
beat back by the Boors, headed by two Professors of
Ʋpsal, and whilest Duke Charles was sailed with his. 
Fleet to reduce the latter, which he did with good success,
the King without any opposition arrived at Calmar. 
several Treaties were then set on foot to endeavour the
settlement of the Kingdom, and to reconcile Matters
betwixt the King and Duke, which proving ineffectual,
both Parties had recourse to Arms. The first encounter
happened near stegeburgh, where the Duke's Forces being
surrounded, were quickly put to the rout, but laying
down their Arms, obtained Pardon from the King;
but the Duke soon made amends for this Misfortune, at
stangbroo, where having surprised part of the King's
Army, he killed 2000 of them upon the spot, with
the loss of 40 Men on his side. This Defeat occasioned an
agreement betwixt the King and Duke upon certain Articles,
of which the Estates were to be Guarrantees, and
the King promised to come forthwith to stockholm to
settle the Affairs of the Kingdom, whither he would
needs go by sea, tho' it was in October, but in lieu of
sailing to stockholm, directed his Course from Calmar
(where he was droven in by contrary Winds) to Dan•
           zick. 
The Duke being surprised at this unexpected departure,
called together the Estates of the Kingdom,
who having once more constituted him Regent of sweden
at their second meeting at stockholm,
         1599. renounced
their Obedience to King sigismund, offering at the same
time the Crown to his son Ʋladislaus, in case he would
come within a twelve Months time into sweden, and be
educated in the Lutheran Religion, but in case of failure
he and his heirs to be excluded from the Crown. 
Duke Charles thereupon marched against the Finns,
         
whom he quickly forced to Obedience, and having made
an Alliance with the Russians,
         1600. convened the Estates of the
Kingdom in the next following year at sincoping, where
some of the Lords that were here, having before fled into
Poland,
         sigismund deposed. were condemned of High Treason and executed
accordingly, and not only King sigismund declared
incapable of the Crown, but also his son Ʋladislaus
(because he had not appeared within the limited
time) excluded from the succession. About the same
time the Duke being certified that the Eastlanders. and
especially those of Reval were inclined to his side, he marched
thither with a great Army, and being received
very joyfully by the Inhabitants of Reval, the
Polish Governours left the rest of the places of Esthland
voluntarily to the disposition of Charles. The same fortune
artended him at first in Livonia, where he took several
places of note without much opposition, but was
forced to raise the siege of Riga upon the approach of
the Poles, who retook Kakenhausen and some other places
thereabouts. Charles having in the mean time got
notice how the Poles had set up the false Demetrius, and
assisted him against the Muscovites, under pretence of
being afraid of the designs of the Poles against sweden,
desired to resign. But these having first offered
the Crown to John King sigismund's half Brother,
who refused to accept of the same, they bestowed it
upon Charles, who being the only son left of King Gustave,
and by his Valour and Prudence having deserved
so well of the Kingdom, the Crown was confirmed to
his Heirs even to the Females. 1604. No sooner was Charles
declared King,Charles IX. 
          but he undertook an Expedition into
Livonia, where he received a signal overthrow from the
Poles, which might have proved of very ill consequence
to sweden, if King sigismund had not been prevented by
the intestine Commotions of the Poles to pursue his Victory. 
The Russians also had slain the false Demetrius,
and having made one suski their Grand Duke, craved
Assistance from King Charles, who sent some Thousand
Auxilaries under the Command of James de la Gardie,
with whose Assistance they were very successful against
the Poles. But in Lifland the Poles got the better of the

         swedes in several encounters, and the Danes seeing the
swedes engaged on all sides,Warbetwixt the swedes and Poles in Livonia. 
          began to make great preparations
against them. The Muscovites also had delivered
their Grand Duke suski up to the Poles, and offered that
Crown to Ʋladislaus the son of sigismund, so that the
swedish Affairs looked with an ill face at that time, if
Prince Gustave Adolph, King Charles's son by his extraordinary
Valour had not upheld their drooping Courage. 
For whilst the Danes wee busy about Calmar, he
with 1500 Horse, not only surprised their chief Magazin
in Blekinyen, which is now called Christianstad, but
also took from them the Isle of Oeland and the Castle of
Borkholm; and whilst he was busy in putting his Forces
into Winter-Quarters his Father King Charles died at
Nycoping in the 61 year of his age. 1611. 
        § 13. Gustavus Adolphus. 
         Gustavus Adolphus being at the time of his Father's
Death, yet under age, was under the Tuition of
his Mother Christina, Duke John and some of the swedish
senators. But the swedes being at that time embroiled
in the Polish and Russian Affairs, and the Danes pressing
hard upon them, it was concluded at the Dyet at
Nycoping, that King Gustave Adolph, notwithstanding he
was not 18 years of age, should take upon himself the
administration of Affairs. The King immediately applied
all his Care to the Danish War, which was carried
on but with indifferent success on the swedish side especially
by sea, where the Danes played the Masters,
the swedish Fleet being but in a very ill condition; and
the Danes having taken besides Calmar, also Risbyfort and
Elffesburgh, two considerable places in sweden. King
Gustave finding this War very grievous to the Kingdom,
and the Muscovites having about the same time declared
themselves very favourably in behalf of his Brother
Charles Philip, (unto whom they offered that Crown)
a Peace was concluded with the Danes, the swedes being
obliged to pay them a Million of Crowns for these
three places above-mentioned. In the mean while James
de la Gardie had so well managed his Affairs in Muscovy,
         1613. 
that the Chiefest among them desired King Gustave
Adolph, and his Brother Charles Philip to come into Muscovy,
but King Gustave Adolph who had more mind to

unite that Crown with sweden than to leave it to his
Brother, was not only very slow in his Resolution, but
also at last in his Answer to the Muscovites only spoke of
his own coming thither, without mentioning his Brother,
which having been interpreted by the Muscovites as if he
intended to make their Country a Province of sweden,
they made one Michael Foedorowitz Romano their Grand
Duke, and when Prince Charles Philip afterwards came
into Muscovy, some of them for a while adhered to him,
but the new Grand Duke having the stronger Party, the
rest also at last left the swedish side, who vigorously attacked
and beat the Muscovites in several Engagements,
and took from them some of their Frontier places,Peace with the Muscovites. 
          till
at last a Peace was concluded betwixt both Partys at
stolbova, by the mediation of the English, by vertue of
which,1617. the swedes got Kerholm and Ingermanland. 
        In the mean while a Truce had been concluded with
Poland for two years, but the same being near exspiring,
King Gustave Adolph resolved to pursue the War against
the Poles with more vigour than before. The better to
put this Design in execution, he after his Coronation
had been performed at Ʋpsal with an universal Joy of
the People,1617. paid to Christian King of Denmark the residue
of the sum due to him by vertue of the last Treaty of
Peace; and having married Mary Eleonora the Daughter
of John sigismund Elector of Brandenburgh,
         1620. he attacked
the City of Riga, which defended it self for six weeks
bravely, but being reduced to the last extremity, surrendred
it self upon very honourable Terms. From
hence he sailed towards Dantzick, to carry the War
into Prussia, but King sigismund being then at Dantzick,
the Truce was renewed for two years longer. 
During the time of the Truce a Peace was proposed betwixt
these two Crowns, which the Polish Estates were
very desirous of, notwithstanding which, King sigismund
persisted in his former Resolution of pursuing the War. 
King Gustave therefore again entred Livonia with a good
Army, where having defeated 3000 Lithuanians, who
under the Command of stanislaus sariecha would have
disputed his Passage, Kakenhausen, Dorpt, and other
places of less note, surrendred themselves to the King. 
From hence he advanced into Lithuania, and took Birsew,
         
and tho' the Poles had nothing left in Livonia, but
only Duneburgh, and the Lithuanians were again defeated
by the swedes near Walsow in sem-Gallia; King
sigismund persisted in his Resolution of carrying on the
War, being encouraged by the Emperour, who then
was very successful in Germany. King Gustave then resolving
to give the Poles a home-stroke,1626. sailed with a
Fleet of 80 ships and 26000 Landmen towards the Pillaw,
where by Order of the Elector of Brandenburgh,
having been received without opposition, he landed his
Men, and without any resistance took Brandenburgh and
Frauenburgh. The next was Elbingen, where the Citizens
having made some shew of resistance, the senate
surrendred the City without making as much as a Capitulation. 
The same good Fortune attended him before
Marienburgh,
         The War carried on against the Poles in Prussia. 
          
         Meve, Dirshaw, stum, Christburgh and other
places in Prussia, which all fell into his hands, before
the Poles had notice of his arrival. soon after the Poles
sent 8000 Horse and 3000 Foot into Prussia, who had
formed a design to surprise Marienburgh, but were repulsed
with the loss of 4000 Men, and were also forced
to raise the siege of Meve. And stanislaus Konierpol ki
with his Podolians also besieged Dirshaw in vam, but retook
Pautske from the swedes, and dispersed some Germen
Troops that were listed in Germany for the service
of King Gustave. In the next spring the swedish
King having received new supplies out of sweden,
         1627. intended
to attack Dantzick, but having received a shot
in the Belly before one of their out-works, he desisted
for that time, but soon after made himself Master of
the said Fort, having first beaten the Poles that came
to its relief, who nevertheless, in the mean while had
forced Meve to a surrendry. soon after, both Armies
encamped near Dirshaw, where King Gustave having
drawn out his Forces in Battel array, the Poles did the
like, having a boggy Ground before them, which the
King did not think fit to pass with his Army; but when
the Poles began to draw off again into their Camp, the
King falling into the Rear, killed them a great number
of Men. But some days after, attacking them in
their Camp, he received a shot in his left shoulder with
a Musquet Bullet, which his Forces being dismayed at,

they returned without any further Action into their
Camp. Towards the latter end of the year, a new
Treaty having been set on foot betwixt the two Kings,
the Treaty was so far advanced, that King sigismund
had resolved to sign it the next day, if the Austrians
(who did promise to send 24 Men of War and 12000
Men to his assistance) had not prevented it. After the
Treaty was broke off, King Gustave, before his Army
went into Winter-quarters, took several places from the
Poles, and at the beginning of the year next following,
attacked a Fort near Dantzick, but was repulsed with
loss. soon after he had a smart Engagement with the
Poles, wherein 3000 of them were killed upon the spot,
the swedes having taken four pieces of Cannon, and fourteen
standards, tho' not without great blood-shed on
their side. Then the King advanced nearer unto Dantzick,
having sent eight Men of War to block up that
Harbour, but the Dantzickers with ten Men of War
having attacked the swedish squadron, they killed the
swedish Admiral Nils sternshield, took his ship, forced
their Vice-Admiral to blow up his own ship, and put
the rest to flight, tho' the Dantzickers also lost their Admiral
and 400 Men in this Engagement. King Gustave then
having detached 1000 foot souldiers, who passed the
Veixel in Boats, they surprised Niewburgh, which being
a Magazin of the Poles, they took most of their Baggage
and 600000 Crowns in Money. 1629. But in the year
next following, he gave them more work; for Herman
Wrangel raised the Blockade of Brodnitz where 3000
Poles were killed, 1000 taken Prisoners, with five Pieces
of Cannon and 2000 Waggons with Provision. The
Poles being frightened at this Defeat, were very desirous
then to receive the Imperial Forces which were sent to
their Assistance under the command of Arnheim, who
with 5000 Foot and 2000 Horse, joined Koniccpoliski,
the Polish General near Graudentz. King Gustave on
the other hand encamped with an Army of 5000 Horse
and 8000 Foot near Quidzin; and tho' the swedes were
much inferiour in number, yet did they not refuse the
Combate; and both Armies soon after having met near
stum, there happened a brisk Engagement betwixt
them, wherein the swed•sh Horse were first repulsed,

with the loss of five standards, but the King coming up
in Person with more Forces, soon forced the Poles to retreat,
who would have passed over a Bridge which
they were laying over the River of Nogat. But King
Gustave endavouring to cut off their retreat that way, the
Fight was renewed on both sides with great fury, so that
the King venturing himself too far, was taken hold of by
his shoulder-belt, which he slipping over his head, got
free of them, leaving his Hat and Belt behind him. 
But immediately after, another catching hold of his
Arm. would have carried him off, if one Erick soop had
not shot the Polander, and delivered the King. In this
Action the swedes got seventeen Colours and five standards,
the Imperial Forces having received the greatest
damage. Not long after, there happened another Engagement
about the same Bridge, where the Poles were
again repulsed, and in the attack of stum, they lost
4000 Men of their best Forces. The Poles having imputed
these Losses chiefly to Arnheim the Imperial General
(who being a Vassal of the Elector of Brandenburgh,
was suspected by them to hold a correspondence with the
said Prince) and being grown quite weary of the Imperial
Forces, being also pestered with Famine and the
Plague, by the mediation of France, England, Brandenburgh
and Holland, a Truce was concluded for six years,
by vertue of which, King Gustave was to restore to Poland,
Brodnitz Wormdit, Melsack, stum and Dirshaw, Marienburgh
was committed to the custudy of the Elector of
Brandenburgh, King Gustave kept the Castle and Harbour
of Pillaw and Mem•l,
         Truce with Poland. 
          as also Elbingen and Braunsbergh,
besides all what he was possessed of in Livonia, so that
King Gustave Adolph had ended both the Russian and
Polish War to his eternal Honour and the great Advantage
of his Kingdom. § 14. German War. 
          But he was not long at rest before Germany was
the scene where he acquired everlasting Glory to his
Nation, and performed some of the greatest Actions that
were ever seen in Europe. As soon as the Protestants in
Germany began to be jealous of the Roman Catholicks
sinister Intentions against them, they were then for
bringing King Gustave over to their Alliance; but he
being at that time entangled in the Polish Affairs, was

not at leisure to engage himself with them. 1626. But Christian
IV. King of Denmark who was ambitious of that
Honour, having in the mean while received a great
Defeat from the Imperialists, who since that had made
themselves Masters of the Lower saxony, and got footing
on the Baltick, King Gustave fearing the consequence
of it, pressed the harder upon the Poles to oblige them
to a Peace or Truce;1623. and having called together the
Estates of sweden, he represented to them the danger
which threatened sweden from the Imperialists, who had
not only got footing on the Baltick, but also made
themselves Masters of a part of Denmark; whereupon
it having been resolved by the Estates, that it was not
advisable to stay till the Enemy should attack them at
home, but to meet him abroad and to keep him from
getting footing on the Borders of the Baltick, the
King only waited an opportunity to put this Design in
execution, which presented it self in the same year. 
For Albert Wallenstein, Duke of Friedland, the Imperial
General, having laid a Design against the City of strahlsund,
the King who was then in Prussia, offered his Assistance
to that City, and having sent them voluntarily
some Ammunition, and exhorted them to a vigorous
Defence; the Citizens accepted of the King's offer, making
an Alliance with him for the Defence of their
City and Harbour, and to maintain their Commerce in
the Baltick. Pursuant to this Treaty, the King sent
some of his Forces to their assistance, who were very instrumental
in defending that City against the Imperialists,
but he did not think fit to attempt any thing further
at that time, because Wallenstein and Tilly were
with two considerable Armies not far off. But as soon
as the •ol•sh War was ended, he resolved not to make
any further delay. Having therefore in vain proffered
his mediation for the procuring of a Peace in Germany,
and represented again to the Estates of sweden the necessity
of meeting the Imperialists with an Army abroad,
he with all expedition prepared himself for the next
Campagne,1630. and having sent Alexander Lesley with some
Troops before, to drive the Imperialists out of the Isle
of Rugen (which he effected) and settled his Affairs at
home, he embarked with 92 Companies of Foot, and 16

of Horse (which were however considerably augmented
afterwards by some Regiments raised in Prussia) and
landed the 24 of June at Ʋsedom. 
         Charles Gustave lands with his Forces in Germany. 
          Upon his arrival
the Imperialists having left their Forts thereabouts and
at Wollin, he re-embarked his souldiers with a Train of
Artillery in some small Vessels and directly took his
course towards stetin, and having obliged the Duke of
Pomerania to receive him and his Forces into that City,
he made a defensive Alliance with him. From hence he
marched to stargard, Anclam, Ʋckermund and Wolgast,
all which places he took without much opposition. And
whilest King Gustave acted with such success against the
Imperialists in Pomerania, Christian Withelm administrator
of Magdeburgh (who had been deposed by the Emperour)
had got into the possession again of the City
and Territories of Magdeburgh, whither King Gustave sent
D•cterick of Falekenbergh to be assisting to the said Administrator
in settling his Affairs that were then in great
confusion. In the mean while several Regiments of Liflanders
and Finlanders were arrived under the Command
of Gustave Horn, these having been joined by such
Troops as were lately come out of Prussia, the King left
his Camp near stetin, he himself marching with his
Army into Mecklenburgh. In his absence the Imperialists
had endeavoured to force the swedish Camp near stetin,
but were vigorously repulsed, and at his return he also
beat them out of Greiffenhagen and Gartz, nay, even
out of the furthermost parts of Pomerania, and the New
Marck. The Archbishop of Bremen, Duke George of
Lunenburgh, and William Landgrave of Hesse, then entred
into an Alliance with the King, and the Protestant
party in general being encouraged at the success, began
to consider of ways and means to rid themselves of the
Roman Catholick yoke. At the beginning of the next ensuing year,1631. King Gustave
at last concluded the so long projected Alliance
with France,
         Alliance made with France. 
          by vertue of which he was to receive a
yearly subsidy of 400000 Crowns from the French
King. Having thus strengthned himself, he notwithstanding
the Winter season, took Lokenitz, Prentzlow,
New Br•ndenburgh, Clempenow, Craptow and Leitz, without
much opposition. Demmin also, where the Duke of

         Lavelli was in Garrison with two Regiments, was surrendred
after a siege of three Days, and Colberg surrendred
after a Blockade of five Months. The Emperour
in the mean while perceiving that his Generals were
not able to cope with King Gustave Adolph, had given to
Tilly the Bavarian General the supreme Command over
his Forces, who being an antient experienced and renowned
Captain marched directly to the relief of Demmin,
but having received intelligence that the place
was surrendred before, he fell with great fury upon
Kniphausen who lay with two Regiments of swedes at
New Brandenburgh, which being a place of no defence,
he forced after a brave resistance, killing most of the
Common souldiers. But perceiving that King Gustave
being strongly entrenched, was not to be forced in his
Camp, he directed his march upwards to Magdeburgh,
in hopes to draw the King out of his advantageous Post. 
But King Gustave marched directly towards Franckfort
upon the Oder, where the Earl of shaumburgh lay with
a small Army, notwithstanding which, he took the place
by storm after a siege of three Days, slew 700 of the
Enemies and took 800, among whom were a great
many Officers of note: From hence he sent a Detachment
to Landsbergh, to endeavour to drive also the Imperialists
from thence. About the same time a general
meeting of the Protestant German Princes was held at
Leipzick▪
          where a League was proposed to be made in
opposition to the demanded res•itution of the Church-Lands. 
Thither King Gustave sent some of his Ministers
to exhort them to a mutual Union against the Emperour,
and to demand some assistance from them of Men and
Money. But the Elector of saxony was very backward
in declaring himself positively, pretending several reasons,
but in effect intended to make himself head of the Protestant
League, and in the mean while to take this opportunity
of putting the Protestants in a good posture,
and to keep the ballance betwixt the Emperour and the
swedes. King Gustave therefore perceiving that the Protestants
in Germany were so very cunning and overcautious,
thought it his best not to venture his Army at
the discretion of others, wherefore tho' he was very willing
to have relieved the City of Magdeburgh, which was

reduced to extremity, yet did he not think it advisable
to march thither before he had secured his retreat. To
render therefore his design effectual, he marched with his
Army strait to Berlin, and having obliged the Elector of
Brandenburgh, partly by fair words, partly by threats, to
put into his hands the Forts of spandau and Custrin for
the security of a retreat over the two Rivers of the Havel
and Oder, he would have straitways marched to the
relief of the City of Magdeburgh, if the Elector of saxony
would have joined him, but whilest the said Electors
made a great many tergiversations, the said City was
taken by storm by General Tilly,
         The City of Magdeburgh taken by the Imperialists, 10 May. 
          who miserably burnt
the City, and killed most of the Inhabitants, there having
been but 400 left of a great many thousands. After
this Disaster, King Gustave having published his Reasons,
why he could not timely enough relieve that City,
and having cleared the whole Pomerania of the Imperialists,
he divided his Army, and having sent part of his
Forces to the assistance the Dukes of Mecklenburgh, he
marched with the rest into Marck and encamped at
Werben near the River Elbe, to observe Tilly, who
having received Intelligence of the King's arrival near
that River, was obliged to alter his march (which he
intended to have directed towards saxony) in hopes to
force the King to a Battel. But the King surprised his
Avaint-Guard near Wolmerstadt, where he totally ruined
three Regiments of Horse. Notwithstanding which,
Tilly approached near the King's Camp at Werben, but the
King refusing of fight, and he not daring to attack him
in his Camp, he was for want of Forrage, obliged to
march back to his former Camp at Wolmerstadt. In the
mean while the Dukes of Mecklenburgh had with the
assistance of the swedish Auxiliaries driven the Imperialists
out of their Territories, except Domitz, Wismar and Rostock,
which places they also kept blocked up. And about
the same time James Marquis of Hamilton came
with 6000 English and scots into Pomerania, but stood
the King in no great stead, most of them dying in the
same year by several Diseases. But Tilly seeing that he
could not attack the King near Werben, decamped from
Wolmerstadt and marched to Eisleben, and from thence
to Halli, from whence he marched with 40000 Men

to Leipsick, which he took soon after. The Elector of
saxony being thus put to a nonplus, was then forced to
send to King Gustave, and to desire him to join his Army
which lay encamped near Torgawi, the King who had
foreseen what would befal him, being already advanced
near New Brandenburgh; and tho' the King was very glad
of this opportunity, yet because the Elector being now
put to a nonplus, now desired what he had resused
before, he proposed to him certain Conditions, which
the Elector having readily granted, he passed the River
Elbe near Wittenbergh with 13000 Foot and 9000 Horse,
and joined the Elector near Dieben. Then a Council
of War having been called (where the Elector of Brandenburgh
also was present) the King, who did not exspect
that the old cunning General would give them
any opportunity to fight, was for acting very cautiously;
but the Elector of saxony was not for protracting the
War, telling them that if the rest refused he would
fight alone: This opinion at last prevailed, the King
then thought it most convenient to attack him immediately
before he could be joined by the Generals Altringer
and Tieffenbach, the first of which was already arrived
near Erffurt, the second being on his march out
of silesia. Thereupon the command of the right Wing
being left to the King, that of the left to the Electors,
they marched towards the Enemy. Tilly had no sooner
been informed of their approach, but he began to fortifie
himself in his Camp near Leipzick. 
         Battel near Leipzick. 7. sept. 
          But Papenheim and
the rest of the Imperial Generals trusting too much upon
the bravery of their Veteran Bands, and despising the
new Levies of the saxons and the swedes that were tired
out by long march would by all means fight the Enemy
in the Plains near Braitenfeld, where Tilly lost the fruits
of his former Victories. He had possessed himself of all
the rising Grounds where he had planted his Cannon,
and had also the advantage of the Wind; but King
Gustave who had put some Battalions of Foot among the
squadrons of Horse, by wheeling about, got the advantage
of the Wind from him, and having obliged the
Imperialists to open their left Wing, John Banner fell in
among them and brought them into confusion. But the
greatest force of the Imperialists fell upon the saxons,
         
whose Infantry and some of the Militia Horse were put
to flight, which obliged the King to fall with his Wing
upon the Enemy's Horse that were in pursuit of the
saxons, whom he quickly also forced to fly. But the
Imperial Infantry still held out, till Gustave's Horse with
some squadrons of the right Wing fell into their Flank;
and the King about the same time having taken all the Enemy's
Artillery, they were put to an entire rout on all
sides, leaving 7600 Men dead upon the spot, besides
what was killed in the pursuit, 5000 Prisoners took service
under the King. Tilly himself who refused Quarter,
was likely to have been killed by a Captain of
Horse, if Rodulf Maximiliun Duke of saxon-Lauenburgh
had not delivered him by shooting the Captain thro' the
head. The swedes took above 100 standards and Colours,
but lost 2000 Men most of them Horse; the saxons
lost 3000, who quickly retook Leipzick, whilest the
King marched towards Merseburgh, where he out to
pieces 1000 of the Enemies, and took 500 Prisoners. 
Then it was resolved at a Council of War held at Halle,
not to follow Tilly, who was retired towards the River
of Weser, but to carry their victorious Arms into the
Emperour's hereditary, and other Roman Catholick
Countries thereabouts. After some dispute it was agreed
that the King should march towards Franconia, whilest
the Elector of saxony entred the hereditary Countries of
the Emperour. Pursuant to this agreement, the King
marched towards Erffurt, (where William Duke of Weimar
was received without opposition) and from thence
into Franconia, where he took Koningshofen and sweinfurt
without any opposition, and the Castle of Wurtzburgh
after some resistance. In the mean while Tilly the
Imperial General having been reinforced by several Troops
that were before dispersed in Germany, was come to the
relief of Wurtzburgh, but coming too late, marched toward
the River of the Tauber to cover the Bavarian and
the Emperour's hereditary Countries on that side, but in
his march the swedes falling into his Rear, cut off four
entire Regiments. The King having then made an Alliance
with the Marquis of Anspach marched towards the
Rhine, surprised Hanaw, but Franckfort on the River of
Mayn surrendred voluntarily, and having possessed himself

of the whole Country of Ringau, directed his march
into the Palatinate, which was then in the possession of
the spaniards. soon after entring the Berghstrate he
took Gersheim, and passed the Rhine near stockstadt, having
defeated the spaniards that would have disputed
his Passage, and at Oppenheim he cut 500 spaniards in
pieces, but the Garrison of Mayence surrendred upon Articles,
and Landaw, spiers, Weissenburgh and Mainheim,
fell soon after into the King's hands. Rostock also and
Wismar having in the mean while been surredred, the
Baltick sea-Coast was cleared from the Imperialists. 
And the Members of the Circle of the Lower saxony at
an Assembly held at Hamburgh, had resolved to levy
6000 Foot and 500 Horse for the defence of that Circle. 
The Elector of saxony in the mean while having refused
the offers made to him by the spanish Ambassadour, had
sent his Army under the command of Lieutenant General
Arnheim into Bohemia, where among other places they
had taken the City of Prague; but having conceived a
jealousy against the King (whom he suspected to aim at
the Imperial Crown) he could not be prevailed upon to
march further into Moravia and Austria. And the Imperial
Court seeing that Tilly was no more able to cope
with the King, resolved to give the supreme Command
of the Imperial Forces to Wallenstein, who being an old
experienced souldier, and in great Authority among the
souldiers, had besides this gathered such riches that he
was able to raise an Army at his own charge. He having
been at last prevailed upon to take upon him the supreme
Command, raised an Army of 40000 Men against the
next spring. 1637. But whilest these Preparations were making
at Vienna, the King's Forces, notwithstanding the Winter
season, having beaten the spaniards upon the Moselle,
had taken Creutznach, Braunfels Kobenhausen and
Kirchbergh, and the King having left the supreme direction
of Affairs on the Rhine to Axel Oxenstirn, he himself
towards the spring marched into Franconia. But
Tilly at his approach, retired on the other side the Danube,
the King possessed himself of all the places along that
River as far as Ʋlm, from whence he marched towards
the River of Lech, where Tilly had entrenched himself
in a Forest on the other side of that River. Here it was

that General Tilly was wounded by a Canon Bullet,
of which he died in a few days after at Ingolstadt. 
His Army being dismayed at the loss of their General
left their advantageous Post, and the swedes having cut
1000 of them in pieces in their retreat marched straightways
into the Country of Bavaria, where they took
possession of Raio, and Niewburgh upon the Danube. 
Augsburgh surrendred without much resistance. But
their design upon Ingolstadt and Ratisbonne miscarried,
being repulsed at the first, where the King's Horse was
shot under him, and Christopher the Marquis of Baden
killed by his side, but the latter the Elector of Bavaria
had secured by throwing some of his Forces into the
place. The King therefore returning into Bavaria set that
Country under Contribution, and the City of Municken
opened its Gates to the King. In the mean while General
Wallenstein, having left the Elector of Bavaria
a while to shift for himself, had driven the saxons out
of Bohemia, by the treachery of their General Arnheim,
who was an utter Enemy of King Gustave, and the
Imperialists under Lieutenant General Pappenheim had
made considerable progresses in the Circle of the Lower
saxony, Wallenstein also had taken a resolution to fall
with all his Forces upon the King in the Country of
Bavaria. Pursuant to this resolution, the Elector of
Bavaria having left a sufficient Garrison at Ingolstadt
and Ratisbonne, marched towards Egen to join Wallenstein,
whom the King pursued in hopes to hinder their
conjunction, but coming too late, he encamped near
Numbergh, till he could be joined by his Forces that
were dispersed in several parts of Germany. Wallenstein
then made a shew as if he would turn his Arms against
the Elector of saxony, thereby to draw the King out
of his advantageous Post near that City; but the King
remaining in his Post he marched towards him, spreading
his Cavalry all round about, which occasioned
a great scarcity of Forage in the King's Camp, but as for
Provisions he was sufficiently supplyed withal from
Numbergh. Whilst the King was reduced to these
straits he received a reinforcement of 15000 Foot, and
10000 Horse from several places, so that being now
superiour in number he attacked Wallenstein in his Camp,

who being strongly Entrenched repalsed the swedes with
the loss of 2000 Men. In the mean time the Imperial
General Pappenheim had beat the Hessians near Volckmarsen,
had forced the Duke of Lunenburgh to raise the
siege of Callenbergh, had beat General Baudist from
before Paterborn and Hoxter, had relieved Wolffenbuttel,
and taken Hildesheim, from whence he was marched
into Thuringia, to join Wallenstein. On the other hand
the saxons were entred silesia with an Army of 16000
Men, where meeting with no opposition, they might
have carried all before them, if their General Arnheim
had not been treacherous to King Gustave, whom he
hated, and was for working a reconciliation betwixt the
Emperour and the Elector of saxony. The King therefore,
not to lose any more time, having put a good Garrison
into Numbergh, resolved to send part of his Army
into Franconia, and with the main Body to return towards
the Danube into Bavaria, where he had taken
several places on the River of Lech. But whilst he was
carrying on his victorious Arms among the Roman Catholicks,
frequent Messengers were sent to him by the
Elector of saxony craving his assistance against Wallenstein,
who was with all his Forces entred into Misnia. 
The King though he had great reason to be dissatisfied
with the Elector, yet fearing he might be forced to
make a separate Peace with the Emperour, if he did not
come to his assistance; he having left some Forces in
Bavaria and suabia, under the Command of Paltsgrave
Christian of Berckenfeld, and commanded Gustave
Horn to remain in Alsatia, where he forced Benfelden to
surrender, (as Franckenthal was about the same time
forced to surrender by Famine) himself marched with
the Army towards Misnia. Being arrived at Nauenbu•gh
he received information that the Enemies had raised the
siege of Werssenfels, and that they had detached Pappenheim
with some Forces upon another design. Having
therefore resolved not to stay for the Duke of Lunenburgh,
who being already arrived at Wittenbergh, was
to have joined him, but to fight the Enemy before he
could be rejoined by Pappenheim. Pursuant to this resolution
he marched to the great Plains near Lutzen,
         Battel near Lutzen. Nov. 6. 
where a most bloody Battel was fought betwixt them,

in which the swedish Infantry fell with such fury upon
the Imperial Foot that they routed them, and made
themselves Masters of their Cannon. But the swedish
Horse being stopt by a broad Ditch, (that was cut cross
the Plains for the conveniency of floating of Wood)
the King put himself at the Head of the smaland Regiment
of Horse, encouraging the rest by his example
to follow him. Thus furiously advancing before the rest,
and being only accompanyed by Francis Albucret Duke
of saxen Launenburgh, and two Grooms, he there lost
his life. Concerning his death there are different opinions,
but the most probable is, that he was shot by the
said Duke of Lauenburgh, who was set on by the Imperialists
that had their only hopes in the King's death. 
The swedes were so far from being dismayed at the King's
death,King Gustave Adolfe killed. that they fell with great fury again upon the
Enemy, whom they routed on all sides. The Imperialists
having been rejoined by Pappenheim would have
rallied again, but Pappenheim having also been killed,
they were routed a second time, leaving an entire Victory
to the swedes, which was nevertheless dearly purchased
by the death of so great a King. § 15. Christina. The death of this great King caused great alterations
in Europe, for, though the Imperialists had lost
the Battel and a great many brave Officers,1633. yet were
they in no small hopes that the swedish Affairs would
now sink under their own weight, and therefore made
great preparations against them the next Campagne. The
Protestants in Germany were by his death divided into
several Factions, not knowing whom they should choose
for their Head, and the swedes overwhelmed with troubles,
his Daughter Christina being then but six years of
Age. Nevertheless, having settled their Affairs at
Home, and committed the Administration of the Kingdom
to the five chief Officers of the state, the chief
management of the Affairs in Germany was committed
to the care of the Lord Chancellour Oxenstirn, who
having been sent by the King's order into the higher Germany,
received this sad News at Hanau. The Chancellour
did not so much fear the Power of his Enemies
as their constancy and unanimous Resolution, whereas

the Protestants were divided in their Counsels and Opinions,
and were not likely to follow his directions after
the King's death, it being not probable that the Electors
and Princes of the Empire would be commanded by a
Foreign Nobleman; nevertheless he thought it not advisable,
by leaving their Conquests, to ruin at once the
Protestant Cause and the Interest of sweden, but rather
to endeavour by a brave resistance to obtain an honorable
Peace. Having therefore sent some Regiments back into
sweden, he divided his Army, and having sent 14000
Men under the Command of George Duke of Lunenburgh
into the Lower saxony and Westphalia, the last
were ordered into Franconia, and some Forces were also
detached towards silesia. These Forces acted with
good success agaist the Imperialists, especially in Westphalia,
where the Duke of Lunenburgh took several
places, defeated the Earl of Mansfeld near Rinteln and
besieged the City of Hamelen. But in silesia the Common
Cause was not carried on with the same forwardness,
by reason of the misunderstanding betwixt the
swedish and saxon Generals, the latter of which keeping
a secret Correspondency with Wallenstein, left the
swedes in the Lurch, who were at last miserably beaten
by the said Wallenstein. But in all other places they
had better success, where their Generals took several
places of note, and the Duke of Lunenburgh had also
retaken the strong City of Hamelen by accord, after
having defeated 15000 Imperialists that were coming to
its relief, whereof 2000 were killed upon the spot, and
as many taken Prisoners. Thus the swedish Army were
every where flourishing but in silesia, nevertheless the
burthen of the War grew heavier upon them every
day, most of their Confederates being grown weary of
the War, and willing to be rid of the swedes. Whilst
they laboured under these difficulties, Wallenstein being
faln in disgrace and killed by the Emperour's order, they
hoped to reap some advantage by this Change, but the
Emperour having made the King of Hungary (his son)
General of his Army, who having taken Ratisbonne, and
being joined by the spanish Forces that were marching
towards the Netherlands besieged Nordlingen, where the
swedish Avantguard intending to possess themselves of

a Hill near that City, were engaged with the Imperialists,
         1634. 
which occasioned a Battel betwixt the two Armies,Aug. 27. 
and the swedish Left Wing having been brought into
disorder by the Polish,
         Battel of Nordlingen. 
          
         Hungarian and Croatian Horse,
was forced back upon their own Infantry, which also
were brought iuto Confusion and totally routed, 6000
having been slain upon the spot, a great number taken
Prisoners, among whom was Gustave Horn, and 130
Colours were lost, besides the whole Artillery and
Baggage. After this Battel the whole Upper Germany
being over-run by the Imperialists, and the Elector
of saxony having made a separate Peace with the
Emperour, the swedish Affairs seemed to be reduced to a
very ill condition, especially since the Elector of Brandenburgh
also had sided with the saxons, and the Truce
with the Poles was near expired about the same time,
which made the swedes very desious of a Peace; but
the same not being to be obtained in Germany they
were fain to prolong the Truce with the Poles for twenty
six years,Truce prolonged with the Poles. 
          and to restore to them their so dearly beloved
Prussia, and to draw France into Germany to their assistance,
to put them in the Possession of Philipsburgh. 
Thus having in a manner settled their Affairs, the War
broke out betwixt them and the Elector of saxony, who
offered them a recompence of mony for the Archbishoprick
of Magdeburgh, which the swedes refusing
to accept of, there happened a sharp Engagement betwixt
them near Allenburgh upon the Elbe, where of
7000 saxons,
         War betwixt the swedes and Elector of saxony. 
          one half were killed, and the rest taken
Prisoners. Notwithstanding this advantage the swedes
had no small obstacles to surmount, since the Emperour
was in Possession of the whole Upper Germany, and
had besides this set the Elector of saxony upon their
Back, which obliged the swedes to take new Measures,
and being now left by all their Confederates, they were
at liberty at least to act more unanimously, though perhaps
with less force, the effects of which appeared soon
after; for though the Elector of saxony had the good
fortune to retake Magdeburgh from the swedes, yet they
soon after revenged this loss near Perlebergh where they
attacked the said Elector with a less number in his fortified
Camp, and having routed his Army killed 5000

upon the spot, besides what were killed in the pursuit,
1100 being killed on the swedish side, and 3000
wounded, and having soon after droven the Imperialists
out of Hessia into Westphalia, and regained Erffurt,
they were again in a fair way to get footing in High Germany. 
They had also in the next ensuing year several
Encounters with the Imperialists and saxons,
         1637. which
proved most to their advantage, Banner having defeated
eight saxon Regiments near Edlenburgh, and soon after
2000 more near Pegau, and when the Imperialists thought
to have got him with his whole Army into their
Clutches near Custrin, he got off with great dexterity,
but could not prevent, but that the Imperialists took
several places in Pomerania, as also near the Rivers of
Havel and Elbe; George Duke of Lunenburgh having
also declared against the swedes, who also began to be
extremely jealous of Brandenburgh by reason of his pretension
upon Pomerania, after the death of Bagislaus XIV. 
the last Duke of Pomerania, (who dyed this year) an
Alliance was concluded betwixt them and France for
three years. The swedes having been brought the year before
somewhat in the straits,1638. they now,Alliance with France. 
          after having received
fresh Recruits began to recover what they had lost the
year before, Banner having driven Gallas the Imperial
General back even into the Hereditary Countries of the
Emperour. And Bernhard Duke of Weimar had the
same success on the Rhine, where having besieged Rhinefelden,
he fought twice with the Imperialists, that came
to its relief, and having routed them in the second Engagement
took Rhinefelden, Kuteln and Fryburgh in
Brisgau. After this exploit having blocked up Brisack
so closely that it was reduced to the utmost by Famine,
the Imperialists endeavoured to relieve it with 12000
Men, which were so received by the said Duke that
scarce 2500 escaped. And not long after the Duke
of Loraine having attempted its relief with 3500
Men, the same were also cut in pieces, and the
place surrendred to the Duke. The Imperialists having
been thus routed both near the Rhine and in the Lower
saxony, the Duke and John Banner had both taken a
resolution to carry the War into the Emperour's Hereditary

Countries, and Banner marched straitways (after
several Defeats given to the Imperialists and saxons)
into Bohemia, where he in all likelihood might have had
great success if the untimely death of Duke Bernhard
(who was to join him) had not broke his Measures. 
This Duke being sollicited by the French to surrender
Brisack into their Hands, (which he refused) was
Poisoned by them, and his Army with great promises
and mony debauched to submit under the French Command. 
The Imperialists then growing too strong for Banner
alone in Bohemia, he marched back into Misnia
and Thuringia, and having been joined by the Duke of
Longueville, who Commanded the Army of the lately
deceased Duke of Weimar and by some Hessians and
Lunenburghers near Erffurt (which made up an Army of
21 Brigades and 2000 Horse) he would fain have Fought
the Imperialists, but these avoiding to come to a Battel
the Campagne was most spent in marching up and down
the Country. But at the beginning of the next ensuing
year Banner had very near surprised the City of Ratisbonne,
         1641. 
where the Emperour and the Estates of the
Empire were then assembled, if the Ice which was by
which was by a sudden Thaw loosned in the River, had
not hindred them from laying a Bridge of Boats, which
design having miscarried, Banner resolved to carry the
War again into Moravia, silesia, and Bohemia. But
the Weimarian Forces under the Command of the
French General having left him thereabouts, the Imperialists
had so closely beset him, that there was no way
left to retreat but through the Forest of Bohemia, which
was done with all expedition, having left Colonel slange,
with three Regiments of Horse behind, who after a
brave resistance were all made Prisoners of War, but
saved the swedish Army, which would else have been in
great danger if they had not detained the Imperialists,
the swedish Army being arrived but half an hour before
them at the Pass of Presswitz, where they stopt the
Enemies march. Not long after dyed the famous
swedish General John Banner,
         May 10. whose death caused some
dissatisfaction in the Army, notwithstanding which
they beat the Imperialists near Wolffenbuttel at two several
times, and Torstenson, (who was made General)

being arrived in the Camp, directed his march into silesia,
where he toook Great Glogau with sword in Hand,1642. 
and a great many other places, the chiefest of which
was sweinitz, where he defeated the Imperialists, that
came to its relief, under the Command of Francis Albert
Duke of saxon Lauenburgh, who was killed himself
and 3000 Horse. Afterwards he besieged Brieg, but
was forced to raise that siege, the Imperialists being
superiour in number, who also prevented him from
marching into Bohemia. Wherefore having directed his
March towards the Elbe, and passed that River at Torgaw,
he straightways went to besiege the City of Leipzick. 
But the Imperialists under the Command of the
Arch Duke,Battel fought near Leipzick. 
          and General Piccolomini coming to its relief,
a bloody Battel was fought in the same Plains near
Breitenfeld, where King Gustave Adolf before had obtained
a signal Victory against the Imperialists. In this
Battel the Left Wing of the Imperialists having been
brought into confusion,Oct. 23. the Left Wing of the swedes
underwent the same fate, but the swedes Left Wing
rallying again and falling in the Flank of the Imperialists
Right Wing, they put them to the rout, 5000 being
killed upon the spot, and 4500 taken Prisoners. 
The swedes lost 2000 Men, and had a great many
wounded. After the loss of this Battel Leipzick was
soon forced to surrender, but Freybergh (which was soon
after besieged by Torstenson) defended it self so well,
that the swedes, upon the approach of the Imperial
General Piccolomini, were forced to raise the siege with
the loss of 1500 Men. And the Weirmarian Army under
the Command of the French General Gebrian was
for the most part ruined by the Bavarians. 
        In the mean while Torstenson had received Orders to
March with his Army into Holstein,
         War with Denmark. 
          the swedes provoked
by a great many injuries,1644. having resolved to
turn their Arms against Denmark; which was executed
with great secresie, so that the swedes coming unexpectedly
upon the Danes took the greatest part of Holstein,
beat their Troops in Jutland and shonen, and
ruined their Fleet; made themselves Masters of the
whole Bishoprick of Bremen, and the Isle of Bernholm,
which obliged the Danes to make a disadvantageous

Peace with them at Bromsebtoo given to the swedes
Jempteland and Herndalen, Gothland and Oesel, besides
other advantages. 1645. 
         Torstenson having then made a Truce
with the Elector of saxony marched again into Bohemia,
         Peace with Denmark. 
         
where another Battel was fought near Janowitz
betwixt the Imperialists and swedes, wherein the first
were routed with the loss of 8000 Men, one half of
whom were killed the rest taken Prisoners. The swedes
had 2000 Men killed. The swedes then marched through
Bohemia into Moravia, and from thence into Austria,
where having been joined by Ragozi they were in a fair
way of making greater progresses, if Ragoz, who had
received satisfaction from the Emperour, had not left
the swedish Army, and marched Home with his Forces. 
The French also under the Command of Turenne having
been again routed by the Bavarians, Torstenson marched
back into Bohemia, who having put his Forces into
Winter Quarters near the River of Eger, and growing
very crazy left the supreme Command of the Army to
Wrangel, who finding the Enemy too strong for him thereabouts,
marched further back into Misnia, and from
thence towards the Weser. But having not long after
been joined by Turenne near Gieslen they attacked Augsburgh
which being reinforced with 500 Men, they were
forced to quit the siege upon the approach of the Imperialists,
who also retook several places in the Hereditary
Countries of the Emperour. Not long after Wrangel
also made a Truce with the Elector of Bavaria, which
however lasted not long, the said Elector having upon
the persuasion of the Emperour broke the same a few
months after, and joined his Forces with the Imperialists. 
But Wrangel marching early out of his Winter Quarters,
in conjunction with Turenne,
         1643. pressed so hard upon
the Bavarians that they were forced to retire to saltzburgh,
leaving a great part of the Country to the discretion
of the Allies, where these burnt a great many
Houses, because the Inhabitants refused to pay Contribution. 
About the same time Koningsmark had surprised
the suburbs of Prague,
         July 16. where he had got a prodigious
Booty in the Imperial Palace, and other Noble-Mens
Houses which are all built on that side of the River,
but could not take the City, which was defended

by 12000 Citizens, so that having sent his Forces into
their Winter Quarters thereabouts, whilst Wrangel was
marching into the Ʋpper Palatinate they received the
News of a Peace being concluded at Munster. 
        This Peace had been long in agitation before it was
brought to perfection,Peace made at Munster and Osnabrug. 
          the Imperialists having endeavoured,
after they saw the swedes recover themselves so
bravely after the Battel of Nomingen to persuade them
to a separate Peace without including the Protestant Estates
in Germany. But the swedes having refused these
offers as being neither honourable nor secure, seven
years were spent in the Preliminaries, and these having
been adjusted the Treaty it self was begun at Osnabrug
and Munster, where the Emperours, spanish, and
Dutch Ambassadours, as also those of the most Roman
Catholick Estates, and the Popes Nuncio were Resident,
but in the first the Imperial Ambassadours also, and those
of most of the Protestant Estates were assembled, where
at last a Peace was concluded, by vertue of which
sweden got the Dukedoms of Bremen and Veerden, the
greatest part of Pomerania, the Isle of Rugen, and the
City of Wismar, to hold these Countries in Fief of the
Empire, with all the Priviledges thereunto belonging,
and five Millions of Crowns towards the payment of
their Armies. Besides this they had the Honour of
having been instrumental in re-establishing several German
Princes in their Territories, and setling both the
Quiet and Protestant Religion in Germany. The
War being thus ended to the great Honour of the
swedes, the Queen, who had already then taken a resolution
of surrendring the Crown to her Nephew
Charles Gustave, would willingly have put an end to
the Differences betwixt sweden and Poland, which were
likely to revive again after the Truce expired, but the
Poles were so haughty in their Behaviour, and refractory
in their Transactions that no Peace could be concluded
at that time. Having therefore settled her Affairs
and reserved a certain yearly allowance for her
self during her life, she surrendred the Crown to the
said Charles Gustave her Nephew at the Dyet at Ʋpsal,
         1654. 
where he was Crowned the same day when she resigned
the Government. Jun. 6. 
        
§ 16. Charles Gustave. 
         Charles Gustave, finding the Treasury exhausted,
obtained at the first Dyet from the Estates that
the fourth part of such Crown Lands as had been granted
away since the Reign of Gustave Adolfe, should be
reunited with the Crown, and having again settled the
Military Affairs, which were somewhat decayed since
the last Peace, resolved to force the Poles to an honourable
Peace. The War with Poland renewed. The better to execute his design, he marched
in Person into Poland, where he met with such success,
that after having defeated some that would have
opposed his passage, not only the Polanders, but also the
Lithuanians submitted voluntarily, swearing Allegiance
to him, and John Casimir, their King, was forced to
fly into silesia. But whilst the King of sweden was
marched into Prussia, the Poles, with the assistance of
the House of Austria, having with the same readiness
again forsaken his Interest, were faln upon the swedes
in their Quarters, of whom they killed a great many,
especially in Lithuania, forcing the rest to seek for shelter
in some strong Holds which were in their possession. 
The King having put an end to the differences betwixt
him and the Elector of Brandenburgh concerning Prussia,
in conjunction with the said Elector, marched back
towards Warsaw, where he obtained a signal Victory
over the Poles and Tartars; and being in the beginning
of the next year joined by Bogislaw Radzivil,
         1656. Prince of
Transylvania, would in all likelyhood have humbled the
haughty Poles, if the Danes had not threatened a dangerous
diversion near Home, and actually denounced
War to sweden. 
        This obliged the King to draw his main Army that
way,War with Denmark. 
          where he not only made great progresses both in
Holstein and Bremen; but also by a prodigy scarce to be
believed by Posterity marched over the Ice into the
Island of Tuhnen,
         1658. and from thence to other Islands, and
at last into sealand, where he carried all before him,
which brought the King of Denmark to such a distress,
that he was forced to clap up a sudden Peace at Rocshild,
giving to the swedes schonen, Halland and Bleckingen,
the Isle of Bernholm, besides several other Possessions in
Norway. But this Peace was of no long continuance,

for the King having again conceived a jealousie at the
Danes, Embarked his Forces in Holstein, and under
pretence of going towards Datzick landed in sealand,
and besieged Copenhagen,
         siege of Copenhagen. 
          whilst Wrangel reduced the
strong Fortress of Cronenburgh. But the Danes being
chiefly encouraged by their King's presence defended
themselves bravely, till the Dutch Fleet gave them relief,
which obliged the King after having attempted,
but in vain, to take it by storm, to raise the siege. But
the greatest misfortune befel the swedes in the Island of
Tuhnen,
         Battel in Tuhnen. 
          where being over numbred by the joint Forces
of the Imperialists, Poles, Brandenburghers and Danes,
they were totally routed near Nyborgh,
         1666. their Infantry
being most cut to pieces, and the rest made Prisoners. 
The King being busie in repairing this loss, was seized
with an Epidemical Fever, of which he dyed on the
23. of February. 
        § 17. Charles IX. 
          
         Charles being but five years old when his Father
dyed, the swedes applyed all their care to obtain
an honourable Peace,Peace made with the Poles, May 3. which was concluded with the
Poles in the Monastery called Oliva, near Dantzick,
wherein were also included the Emperour and Elector
of Brandenburgh, and King John Casimir resigned his
pretension to the Crown of sweden, and the Poles to
Livonia. In the same month a Peace was concluded
with Denmark,
         May 23. Peace made with Denmark. 
          much upon the same conditions, which
were agreed on formerly at Rocshild, except that the
Danes kept the Isle of Bornholm, and Druntheim in
Norway. For the rest, the swedes were for preserving
Peace with their Neighbours during the minority of the
King, till having broke off the Triple Alliance made
betwixt them, and the English and Dutch they sided
with France against the Elector of Brandenburgh,
         1674. whom
they pretended, by sending an Army into his Territories,
to draw from the Interest of the Empire. But
this occasioned a heavy War to the King, at the very
beginning of his Reign,The swedes routed by the Elector of Brandenburgh. 
          wherein the Elector having
routed the swedish Army, took all what the swedes were
possessed of in Pomerania, as the Lunenburghers got into
their possession the Dukedoms of Bremen and Veerden,
and the King of Denmark the City of Wismar,
         
and several considerable places in shonen, but the Danes
having at last been routed at two Battels in shonen, the
King after the Treaty of Nimeguen, by a particular Peace
was put again into the possession of his Countries in
Germany, very few excepted, and Denmark was forced
also to restore the places taken from the swedes in
shonen. This Peace having been again settled in sweden,
the King married Ʋlrica Eleanora the present King of
Denmark's sister, since which time the King has chiefly
applied himself to settle his Military Affairs and Revenues,
and to maintain the Peace with his Neighbours. 1678. 
        § 18. The nature and qualification of the swedish Nation. The swedish and Gothick Nation has antiently
been famous for Warlike Archievements, and is very fit
to endure the Fatigues of War; yet were their Military
Affairs in former times but very indifferently ordered,
their chiefest Force consisting in the Boors, till Gustave
and his successours with the assistance of some scotch and
German Officers and souldiers have introduced such a
Discipline as that now they do not stand in so much
need of foreign souldiers, except it be to make up the
number of Men, wherewith they are not overstocked,
especially since the late great Wars. As in most other
Kingdoms of Europe, by reason of the multitude of their
populous Cities, the Estate of the Citizens is the fundamental
part of the state, so is in sweden that of the Boors,
who enjoy more liberty in sweden than in other Kingdoms,
and also send their Deputies to the Dyet, where
their consent is requisite to any new Taxes to be levied
upon the subjects. This Nation loves to shew a great deal of gravity
and reservedness, which if not qualified by conversation
with other Nations, often degenerates into mistrustfulness. 
They generally are apt to think very well of themselves,
and to despise others. They have sufficient Capacity
to attain to the first Principles of any Art or science,
but commonly want Patience to attain to the perfection
of them. Their inclination is not much to Trade
or Handy-work, and therefore Manufacturies are but
little encouraged among them. 
§ 19. Condition of the Country and its strength. The Kingdom of sweden is of a great extent,
but full of great Forests and innumerable Lakes, and the
sea-Coast surrounded with many Rocks. But deeper
into the Country, there are a great many fertile tracts
of Ground, the Forests furnish them with Fuel, and the
Lakes with great store of good Fish, which also contribute
much to the easie transportation of the Native Commodities
from one place to another. The Country produces
Corn sufficient for its Inhabitants, neither is there
any want of Cattel or Horses. sweden produces more
Copper and Iron than any other Kingdom in the World,
and their Mines are fitted by nature for that purpose,
being surrounded with Woods and Rivulets. There is
a silver Mine in Westmanland. Finland brings forth
Pitch, and Tar, and Deal; and Wermeland good store
of Masts. The Native Commodities of sweden are
Copper, Iron, Tar, Pitch, Masts, Boards &c. In lieu
of which, sweden receives from abroad Wine, Brandy,
salt, spices, Cloaths, silk and Woollen stuffs, fine Linnen
Cloath, French Manufactories of all sorts, Furs, Paper
and such like, all which in some years surpasses in
value the Commodities fit for exportation here. To
recompence this, Navigation and Commerce has been
encouraged of late years among the Natives, and several
sorts of Manufactories, whereof those made of Copper,
Iron and Brass would questionless turn to the best
account, if these Artists were duely encouraged to settle
themselves in this Kingdom, Copper and Iron being the
foundation of the swedish Commerce abroad. This
present King has put their Forces both Horse and Foot in
a better Condition than ever they were before, which
are maintained in sweden, with a small charge to the
Crown, the Foot being maintained by the Boors, but
the Horsemen have for the most part some Farms in their
possession belonging to the Crown, the Revenues of
which are their pay. But the King's Guards are paid
out of his Treasury. Formerly the station of the Royal
Navy was at stockholm, but since a new Harbour has
been made in Bleckingen, where the ships may be put
to sea sooner, and with more conveniency. Besides this,
sweden has this advantage, that it is covered on the side

of Norway with inaccessible Rocks, besides the three
strong Fortresses of Bahus, Marstrand and Gothenburgh,
and the swedish and Finland Coasts are so well guarded
by innumerable Islands, that it is very difficult to approach
the shoar. § 20. Neighbours of sweden. 
          As to the Neighbours of sweden, it borders on
the East side upon Muscovy, with whom the swedes in
former times were often at War,Muscovites. but since Finland is
now well covered against them by the Fortresses of
Narva, Kexholm and Noteburgh, and they have learned
by experience that the swedes are better souldiers than
they, there is nothing to be feared from thence. And
since the swedes have no great reason to covet any further
Conquests on that side, they may be taken now for
good Neighbours. Poles. With the Poles the swedes used formerly
to have no difference at all, except when in outrage
that Nation espoused the quarrel of their King concerning
his Title to sweden. But since Charles Gustave
a little humbled their pretensions upon Livonia, as the
swedes have done upon Prussia, the Poles for the future
may in all likelihood prove good Neighbours to sweden. 
         Germany. 
The swedes have had antiently a great Communication
with the Germans, by reason of their Commerce with
the Hanse Towns. But since the swedes have by the
Westphalia Treaty been put into possession of two Provinces
in Germany, they enjoy the same right with the
rest of the Estates, and the King of sweden is now to be
considered as a Member, and not as a Neighbour of the
Empire, whose Interest therefore is to see, that the Westphalia
Treaty be kept in vigour. There is some jealousy
betwixt the swedes and the Elector of Brandenburgh,
about some part of Pomerania, which would else have
fallen to that Elector's share, and besides this, he is obliged
to keep up a constant standing Army against so considerable
a Neighbour, but since sweden has preserved
Brandenburgh and the rest of the Protestant Estates, and
the said Elector has received a triple equivalent for this
loss, it is but reasonable that something of allowance
should be given as to this point especially, since it is not
for the Interest of sweden to make any further Conquests
in Germany. But betwixt the swedes and the House of

         Lunenburgh, there ought to be a good understanding, since
they are able to do one another great service against
Denmark Brandenburgh and the Westphalian Bishops. 
since sweden by making the sea the borders betwixt
them and Denmark,
         Denmark. has put a stop to these troubles
which formerly used to proceed from the too near neighbourhood
of the Danes, and secured their Trade, it ought
not to make any attempt of further Conquests in Denmark,
it being the Interest of most Estates of Europe, to
take care that neither of the two Northern Kings become
sole Master of the sound. Wherefore sweden
ought to endeavour to keep the present limits betwixt
them and Denmark, and to live in amity with those Estates
in Germany, who are jealous of the Neighbourhood
of Denmark. The foundation of the good Correspondency,France. 
betwixt France and sweden was built upon the
common agreement of keeping under the overgrown
Greatness of the House of Austria, but since the case is
now altened, the King of France now pretends to play
the Master over Princes. sweden ought not to assist France
in those Designs which overturn the Westphalian. Treaty,
or are intended against the Protestants in Germany and
Holland. The good understanding betwixt sweden and
Holland is chiefly founded upon this bottom,Holland. that as
sweden cannot be glad to see Holland ruined, so the Hollanders
are obliged to prevent the King of Denmark from
making himself sole Master of the passage of the sound
or the Baltick. 
         England. 
         England has hitherto had so little concern
with those Northern parts, that their greatest Correspondency
has been transacted by way of contemplating
with very little Reality. spain and Portugal. 
         spain is considered by the
swedes as a part of the House of Austria, tho' the swedes
have so far a concern in the spanish Netherlands, as
from their preservation depends the welfare of Holland. 
But the good understanding betwixt sweden and Portugal
depends only from the mutual Commerce of these two
Nation, who else by reason of this great distance can
scarce be serviceable to one another. "
"19","BOOKs printed for Matth. Gillyflower at the
spread-Eagle in Westminster-Hall. COmpleat Gardiner; or, Directions for Cultivating and
right Ordering of Fruit-Gardens and Kitchen-Gardens;
with diver Reflections on several parts of Husbandry,
in six Books. By the Famous Monsieur de la Quintinye▪
        
Chief Director of all the Gardens of the French King. To
which is added his Treatise of Orange Trees, with the raising
of Melons, omitted in the French Editions. Made
English by J. Evelyn 
        Esq illustrated with Copper Plates. The Commentaries of Julius Caesar of his Wars in Gallia,
and the Civil Wars betwixt him and Pompey, with many
Excellent and Judicious Observations thereupon. By
Clement Edmonds Esquire. To this Edition is now added at the end of every Book
those Excellent Remarks of the Duke of Rohan; also the
Commentaries of the Alexandrian and African Wars. Written
by Aulus Hirtius Pansa, now first made English, with
a Geographical Nomenclature of the Antient and Modern
Names of Towns, together with the Life of Caesar, and an
account of his Medals. The Roman History from the building of the City to the
settlement of the Empire by Augustus Caesar, being 727
years, for the better understanding of the Roman Authors
and Roman Affairs. By Lawrence Etchard A. M. The Life of the Famous Cardinal Duke de Richlieu,
Principal secretary of state to Lewis XIII. A new Voyage to Italy, with a Description of the Chief
Towns, Churches, Tombs, Libraries, Palaces, statues and
Antiquities of that Country, with useful Instructions for
those who shall travel thither. By Maximilian Misson, Gent. 
Adorned with Figures. "
"20","BOOKs printed for Tho. Newborough at the
Golden Ball in st. Paul's Church-Yard. THE Great Historical, Geographical and Poetical Dictionary;
being a Curious Miscellany of sacred and
Prophane History, containing the Lives of the Patriarchs,
Judges and Kings of the Jews; of the Fathers of the
Church; of the Popes, &c. of Heresiarchs: with an Account
of their principle Doctrines; of Emperours, Kings
and Illustrious Princes, &c. of Philosophers, Inventors of
Arts, and those that have recommended themselves to the
World. The Genealogy of several Illustrious Families in
Europe, the Fabulous History of the Heathen Gods, &c. 
the Description of Empires, Kingdoms, Commonwealths,
Islands, Mountains and Rivers, and other considerable
Places of Geography, &c. Collected from the best Historians,
Chronologers and Lexicographers, by Lewis
Morery, D. D. The sixth Edition, Corrected and Enlarged,
by Monsieur l' Clarke. To which are added the
Lives and most Remarkable Actions of the English, scotch
nad Irish Nobility, Gentry, Clergy and Artificers, &c. by
several Learned Men; with the five Years Historical and
Geographical Collections of Edmund Bohun Esqiure, never
yet published. Geographia Universalis: The Present state of the whole
World. Giving an Account of the several Religions,
Customs and Riches of each People: The strength and
Government of each Polity and state: The Curious and
most Remarkable Things in every Region; with other
Particulars necessary to the understanding History and the
Interest of Princes. Written Originally at the Command
of the French King, for the use of the Dauphin, by the sieur
Duval, Geographer in Ordinary to his Majesty. The
Third Edition, Corrected and Enlarged, by R. Midgley. 
M. D. "
