"","x"
"1","THE
GRAND QUEsTION,
Concerning the
Bishops Right
To VOTE in
parliament
In Cases Capital,
sTATED and ARGUED,
FROM
The parliament-Rolls, and the
History of former Times. 
WITH
An Enquiry into their Peerage, and
the Three Estates in parliament. 
      LONDON,
Printed for M. P. and sold by Richard
Rumball Book-binder, at the Ball and Coffin
in the Old Change, 1680. "
"2","THE
CONTENTs. CHAP. I. THE Question stated; and general
Prejudices removed. CHAP. II. The Right in point of Law debated. 
Concerning the Constitution of Clarendon,
and the Protestation 11. R. 2. CHAP. III. The Precedents on both sides laid down:
those against the Bishops examined and answered. CHAP. IV. The Peerage of the Bishops cleared; how
far they make a third Estate in parliament. 
Objections against it answered. "
"3","CHAP. 1. The Question stated; and general Prejudices
removed. THE Question in debate, as it is stated
by the Authour of the Letter,
is,
        Letter p. 1. Whether the Bishops may be present
and Vote Iudicially in Capital Cases,
which come to be judged in parliament, either
in giving the Iudgment it self, or in
resolving and determining any circumstance
preparatory and leading to that Iudgment?For our better proceeding towards
a Resolution of this Question, it will be necessary
to take notice of some things
granted on both sides, which may prevent
needless disputes, and be of great
use in the following Debate. 1. It is granted,
        Lett. p. 93. That the Bishops do sit in
parliament by virtue of their Baronies, and
are bound to serve the King there. And
one part of the service due to the King
there, is to sit in Iudgment: for the Authour
of the Book entitled, The Iurisdiction
of the House of Peers asserted, proves

at large, that the Right of Iudicature belongs
to the Barons in parliament; and
that the Lords spiritual have a considerable
share therein, appears by this passage,
in the Title-page of that Book, translated
into English. The Iudgment of the Lords spiritual and
Temporal is according to the Vse and Custom
of parliament. The Vse and Custom of parliament is
the Law of parliament. The Law of parliament is the Law of
England. The Law of England is the Law of the
Land. The Law of the Land is according to
Magna Charta. 
      Therefore the Iudgment of the Lords
spiritual and Temporal is according to
Magna Charta. 
      some Right then of Iudicature in parliament
the Bishops have by Magna Charta:
which, whatever it be, is as much theirs
by that Charter as any Right of Temporal
Persons; and cannot be invaded or
taken from them without breach of that
Charter, any more then the Rights of the
Lords Temporal, or of any other Persons
whatsoever. But how far that Right doth
extend, is now the thing in Question. 
2. It is not denied, that the Bishops
do sit in parliament by the same kind of
Writs that other Barons do. They are summoned
to advise and debate about the
great and difficult Affairs of the Kingdom;
cum Praelatis, Magnatibus & Proceribus
dicti Regni nostri Angliae colloquium habere
& tractatum; i. e. to joyn therein
with the Bishops and other Lords of the
Kingdom. so that by the King's Writ
of summons they are impowered and required
to confer and treat of all the
weighty Affairs that shall be brought before
them. And no Instance is so much
as offered to be produced of any Writ
wherein the King doth limit and restrain
the Bishops, any more then any other
Lords of parliament, as to any matter of
Consultation, or Point of Judicature,
belonging to that House. They have
then by their Writ of summons as good
right to sit in all Cases, as in any: and
since the other Lords by their Writs are
summoned to advise with the Prelates in
all matters that shall come before them,
without limitation, it is not to be conceived
how this can be done, if the Bishops
in some of the most important Debates
be excluded. 3. It is yielded,Lett. p. 3. 118. That if the House proceeds

in a Legislative way by passing Bills
of Attainder, the Bishops have a Right to
sit and Vote therein as well as other Lords:
at these it is said, that the Bishops are or
should be all present at the passing of them,
for then they act as Members of the House
of Lords in their Legislative capacity. But
men do as certainly die that are condemned
in the Legislative, as in the Iudicial
Way. Is not this then really as much a
Case of Bloud as the other? If the Bishops
should give their Votes in the Legislative
way to condemn a Person for
Treason, and yet think they had not Voted
in a Case of Bloud; they would then
indeed be like Chaucer's Frier, mentioned
by the Authour of the Letter, that would
have of a Capon the Liver,
        Lett. p. 66. 
        and of a Pig
the Head, yet would that nothing for him
should be dead. Doth a Bill of Attainder
cut of a man's Head without making it a
Case of Bloud? There can be then no
objection now made against the Bishops
Right from any Canons of the Church;
for those allow no such distinction of proceeding
in the Legislative, or Iudicial
Way. P. 21. And the late Authour of the Peerage
and Iurisdiction of the Lords spiritual
doth grant, that the Canons do prohibit
the Bishops voting in Bills of Attainder,

as much as in any Case whatsoever. 
      But we are not to suppose a Person of
such abilities as the Authour of the Letter,
would go about to exclude the Bishops
from their Right of Voting in a Iudicial
way in Cases Capital, unless there were
some great appearance of Law on his side;
because he professes so great a Desire that
Right may prevail;
        Lett. p. 2, 3. and that his design in
writing was, to satisfy himself and others
where that Right is. The discovery whereof
is our present business. Yet before
the Authour of the Letter comes to a close
debate of the matter of Right, he lets fall
some general Insinuations to create a prejudice
in the Reader's mind, as to the Bishops
meddling at all in secular Affairs, as
though it were inconsistent with their
Function, and with some passages in the
Imperial Law. And because men may
sometimes doe more harm by what they
tell us they will not say, then by what they
do say; it will be fit to prevent the danger
of such Insinuations, before we come to
consider his Arguments. 
      1. The first is,Lett. p. 5. 
        that meddling at all in
secular Affairs seems to be the doing that
which the Apostles declared they would not
doe, viz. leave the Word of God, and serve
Tables. But are all Persons of Estates now

bound to part with them, as the Christians
then did? The serving of Tables was
a full employment; and they who attended
that Office were the Treasurers of
the Church, to distribute to every one
as they judged fit, out of the common
stock. Is it no service to God, to doe Justice,
and to shew Mercy? to attend upon
the publick Affairs of the Kingdom, when
they are called to it by their sovereign?
Or are all Bishops now in the same circumstances
the Apostles were when the
Christian Church was to be planted in
the World, and so few persons as the
12 Apostles made choice of for that
Work? Is there no difference to be made
between a Church constituted and settled
and incorporated into the Commonwealth,
and one not yet formed, but labouring
under great difficulties, and making its
way through constant persecutions?
May it not be as well argued, that Bishops
are not to stay in one Countrey, nor to
have any fixed habitation, because the
Apostles passed from place to place preaching
the Word of God? Doth not the
Authour of the Letter himself confesse,
that the Clergy are one of the Three Estates
of the Kingdom?
        Lett. p. 86. and by the Act 8 Eliz. 1. 
the Clergy are called one of the greatest

states of this Realm. And is there not
then great Reason, that those who are the
chief part of it, as he confesseth the Bishops
to be, should have a share in affairs that
concern the whole Nation? And would
it not seem strange to the Christian
World, that we alone of all the Kingdoms
of Europe should exclude the Bishops from
having an equal Interest with the other
Estates in parliament? For it were easy
to prove from unquestionable Testimonies,
that as soon as the Christian Religion
was well settled in any of these Northern
Kingdoms, the Bishops were admitted
into all the publick Councils:
and have so continued to this day, where
the Convention of the Estates hath been
kept up; Bohemia onely excepted since
the days of sigismond. 
      I begin with France, where Hincmarus
saith,Hincmar. Epist. de Ordine lalatii. 
        there were two great Councils every
year: one of the states of the Kingdom, for
ordering the Affairs of the ensuing year, and
redressing of Grievances; and in these the
Bishops were always present: and the other
of the King's Council, which managed the
intervening Affairs; and into this the
chief of the Bishops were chosen. It were
endless to repeat the several parliaments
in France in the time of the Merovingian
        
and Caroline Race, wherein Laws
were passed, and the great Affairs of the
Kingdom managed by the Bishops, Noblemen,
and others. Those who have
looked into the ancient Annals and Capitulars
of France, cannot be ignorant of
this. There is one thing remarkable to
our purpose in the famous Council of
Frankford, which opposed the Worship of
Images so stoutly, viz. that after the matters
of Religion were agreed, then, according
to the Custom of that Age, the
other Estates being present, they proceeded
to other matters: and then Tassilo
Duke of Bavaria was brought upon his
Knees for Treason; and the Cause of
Peter Bishop of Verdun was heard, who
was likewise accused of Treason, and
there purged himself. Concerning both
which Cases there are 2 Canons still extant
among the Canons of that Council:Concil. Franc. c. 3. & 9. 
and in another, the Bishops are appointed,
by consent of the King, to doe Justice in
their several Dioceses. And that they
had not onely a share in the Legislative,
but in the Iudiciary part, appears by one
of the ancient Formulae in Marculphus,
        Marculph. Form. l. 1. c. 25. 
where it is said, that the King sate in
Judgment unà cum Dominis & Patribus
nostris Episcopis, vel cum plurimis Optimatibus

nostris; (vel, in the language of
that Age, is the same with &. ) This was
the Palatine Court,Not. in Marc. p. 287. where Bignonius
saith the greater Causes were heard, the
King himself being present, (or the Comes
Palatii,) Episcopis & Proceribus adsidentibus,
the Bishops and Lords sitting in Iudicature
together with him. And this was
not onely the Original of the parliament
of Paris, as a standing Court of Iudicature;
but the like in England was the
true foundation of the supreme Court of
Iudicature in the House of Peers. so
that in the eldest and best times of France,
after Christianity had prevailed there,
neither consultation about publick Affairs,
nor administration of Justice were thought
inconsistent with the Function of Bishops. In spain, during the Gothick Power, all
the great Affairs of the Kingdom, and
even the Rights of their Princes, were
debated and transacted by the greatest of
the Clergy and Nobility together; as may
be seen in the several Councils of Toledo
in that time,Concil. Tolet. 4. c. 75. 5. c. 7. 6. c. 17. 8. in Praef. 12. c. 1. 17. c. 1. 17. c. 1. in the case of suintilas, sisenandus
and others. And in one of
them it is said, that after they had dispatched
matters of Religion, they proceeded
ad caeterarum Causarum negotia, to
the handling of other Causes. 
        Cont l. Tolet. 13. c. 2. In the 13. 

        Council of Toledo, the Case of Impeachments
of Treason is brought in; and Rules set
down for due proceedings therein. And
yet from one of these Councils of Toledo
it is, that all the stir hath been made in
the Canon-Law about Bishops not being
present in cases of bloud. In Germany, the first Laws that were
ever published were those by Lotharius II. 
in Comitiis Regni,
        Rer. Aleman. To. 2. Cod. Leg. Antiq. B. 362. saith Goldastus; and
there were present 33 Bishops, 34 Dukes,
72 Counts, besides the People. And by
the Matriculation-Roll of the states of the
Empire, it appears what a great Interest
the Clergy have preserved ther in from the
first times of the prevalecy of Christianity
there. Arumae. de Comitiis •. 35. c. 4. •. 98. And Arumaeus, a considerable
Protestant Lawyer of the Empire,
saith, the Bishops of Germany sit in a double
capacity in the Diets, both as Bishops,
and as Princes of the Empire. And he
commends the prudence of that Constitution
with respect both to Iustice, and the
Honour and safety of Religion. 
      For the Kingdom of Bohemia,Goldast. Bohem. l. 5. c. 1. Goldastus,
a learned Protestant, saith, that
there, as in all other well-constituted Kingdoms
among Christians, there were 3 Estates,
of Prelats, Nobles, and Commons;
and this continued, he saith, from

the time Christianity was received, till the
days of sigismond. 
      No sooner was Christianity received in
Hungary,
        Bonfin. dec. 2. l. 1. but their Princes, stephanus
and Ladislaus, called their great Councils
of their Prelats and Nobles: and the
Laws made in the Concilium Zabolchianum
were passed by the King,
        Decret. Ladiss. p. 12. with all his
Bishops and Nobles, and with the consent
of the whole Clergy and People. 
      In Poland,starovolse. •olon. p. 2•5. starovolscius saith, that
their Ancestours, after they received Christianity,
out of regard to Religion, gave the
Bishops the first place in the senate; and
admitted the Clergy to the great Offices of
the Kingdom. Herburt. stat. Regni Pol. p. 263. 
        And sigismond in his Constitution
saith, the states of Poland consist
of the Bishops, Barons, and Delegates,
called Nuntii terrestres. In the Northern Kingdoms,
        Adam. Brem. de situ Dan. n. 85. Adamus
Bremensis saith, that the Bishops, after the
People received Christianity, were received
into their publick Councils. Loccen. Antiq. s•eco. Goth. c. 8. 
        And Loccenius
reckons up among the several Estates, the
Bishops, Nobles, Knights, and Deputies
of the Country and Cities. And it appears
by the Hirdstraa,Ius Aulicum N•rveg. c. 3. c. 36. 
        or the ancient
Laws of Norway, the Bishops as well as Nobility
were present in the Convention of the
states, and all publick Councils. 
The like might be proved here in the
saxon times, from the Conversion of Ethelbert
downward. This is so very evident,
that he must blind his eyes that
doth not see it, if he doth but cast them
on the History of those times. These things I have laid together with
all possible brevity and clearness, that in
one view we may see a consent of all these
parts of the Christian World, in calling
Bishops to their publick Councils, and most
solemn Debates; and how far they were
from thinking such Imployments inconsistent
with their sacred Function, and
charging them, that thereby they left the
Word of God to serve Tables. Neither can
this be looked on as any part of the Degeneracy
of the Church, or the Policy
of the Papacy; since, as the fore-cited
Arumaeus saith, they were admitted to this
honour before the Papal Power was advanced;
and were so far from carrying on the
Pope's designs, that they were, in most
Countries, the greatest Opposers of them. 
And when the Popes began to set up
their Monarchy, their business was, to draw
them off from meeting in these Councils,
under several pretences of Cases of Bloud,
and other things; the better to keep
them in a sole Dependency on themselves. 

As will appear by the following Discourse. 2. The next thing suggested is, that
the Imperial Law doth forbid Clergy-men
having any thing to doe with secular matters. Lett. p. 3, 4. 
        And for this a Rescript of Honorius
and Theodosius is mentioned, and a
Decree of Iustinian. To which I answer,
      1. The Imperial Edicts are not the Law
of England. Our dispute is about a Right
by our own Laws; which a Rescript of
Honorius and Theodosius can neither give
nor take away. What would become of
the whole frame of our Government,
and of our just Rights and Properties, if
the producing of Imperial Edicts would
be sufficient to overthrow them? When
the Bishops once pleaded hard in parliament
in behalf of an Imperial Constitution,
lately adopted into the Canon-Law,
the Answer given by all the Temporal
Lords was,stat. Merton c. 9. 20 H. 3. 
        Nolumus leges Angliae mutare,
quae huc usque usitatae sunt & approbatae. 
They did not mean, they would make
no alterations in parliament, for that very
parliament did so in several things:
but their meaning was,Dissert. ad Flet. c. 9. § 2. as Mr. selden observes,
that they owned neither Canon
nor Imperial Laws here, any farther then
they were agreeable to the Laws of the
Land. 
2. The Imperial Constitutions do give
liberty to Church-men to have to doe in
secular Affairs. The Emperour Constantine,
whose Constitutions deserve as
great regard as those of Honorius and
Theodosius, to shew his respect to the
Christian Religion, permitted all men to
bring their Causes before the Bishops,
without ever going to the other Tribunals,soz. hist. l. 1. c. 9. 
as sozomen, a Lawyer of Constantinople,
relates. And this is the true foundation
of the Constitution De Episcopali
Iudicio; as Gothofred confesseth. Which
is at large inserted into the Capitulars,
        Capitul. Carol. & Ludov. l. 6. c. 281. ed. Lindenb. c. 366. ed. Baluz. 
with a more then usual introduction;
and made a Law to all the subjects of the
Empire, Franks, saxons, Lombards, Britons,
&c. and therefore is more considerable
to these parts then a bare Rescript
of Honorius and Theodosius. And yet,
these very Emperours,Cod. Just. de Epise. Audient. l. 1. tit. 4. c. 8. in a Constitution of
theirs, do so far ratifie the Judgment of
Bishops upon Trial by consent before
them, that no Appeal doth lie from their
Decree. What Rescript then is this of
theirs which so utterly forbids Clegy-men
having any thing to doe with publick
Functions, or things appertaining to the
Court? I suppose that Constitution of
Honorius is meant, which confines the

Bishops Power to what concerns Religion;
and leaves other Causes to the ordinary
Judges and the Course of Law. 
But two things are well observed by Iac. 
Gothofred concerning this Rescript of Honorius:
        Cod. Theodos. l. 16. tit. 11. c. 1. 
1. that it is meant of absolute
and peremptory Judgment without Appeal;
2. that whatever is meant by it,
not many years after, this Constitution
was repealed by Honorius himself, and
the Bishops sentence made as absolute as
before. so that Honorius is clearly against
him, if a man's second judgment and
thoughts be better. 3. The practice of the best men in those
Ages shews, that they thought no Law
in force to forbid Church-men to meddle
in secular Affairs: as might be at large
proved from the practice of Gregory Thaumaturgus
and s. Basil in the East;
        Greg. Nyss. vit. Greg. Basil. in ep. socr. l. 7. c. 37. of silvanus
Bishop of Troas, of s. Ambrose, s. Augustine,
and others of the greatest and
most devout Church-men of those times. Ambros. de Offic. l. 2. c. 24. 
And s. Augustine was so far from thinking
it unlawfull,Aug. ep. 147. in Ps. 118. conc. 24. that in his opinion
s. Paul commanded the Bishops to doe it. 
Constituit enim talibus Causis Ecclesiasticos
Apostolus Cognitores. And the learned
Gothofred of Geneva saith,Jac. Goth. in cod▪ Theod. ad Extrav. de Episc. judicio. 
        Mos hic
frequens & legitimus eundi ad Iudices

Episcopos. It was then a common and legal
practice to go to Bishops as to their
Iudges. Which would never have been,
if there had been a Law in force to forbid
Bishops meddling in secular Affairs. 4. The Emperours still reserved to
themselves the power of dispensing with
their own Rescripts, and the Canons of the
Church. Concil. sardic. c. 7. Therefore the Council of sardica,
when it prohibits Bishops going to
Court, excepts the Princes calling them
thither. Upon which Balsamon hath this
Note; that although the Canons prohibit,
yet if the Emperour commands, the Bishops
are bound to obey, and to doe what he commands
them; without any fault either in
the Emperour or them. And in other
places he asserts the Emperour's power
of dispensing with the strictest Canons against
Church-mens meddling in secular
Affairs:Balsam. in Can. 4. Concil. Chalced. Thence he saith, the Metropolitan
of side was chief Minister of state
under Michael Ducas; and the Bishop of
Neocaesarea made the Laws of the Admiralty
for Greece. And the Glosse upon Iustinian's
Novells observes,Auth. Collat. 1. tit. 6. Novell. 6. c. 2. that Bishops
may meddle with the Affairs of the Commonwealth,
when their Prince calls them
to it. And this is the present Case; for

the Bishops are summoned by the King's
Writ to serve him in the publick Council
of the Nation: and therefore no Imperial
Rescript, if it were of force in England,
could have any in this Case, which
was allowed by the Imperial Laws themselves. 5. There is a great Mistake about Iustinian's
Decree. Justin. Cod. l. 1. tit. 3. c. 41. For the Bishops are not
so much as mentioned in it; but the Defensores
Ecclesiarum; who were Lawyers,
or Advocates of the Church: as appears
by a Constitution of Honorius; where
Gothofred proves they were not so much
as in Orders. Cod. Theod. l. 16. tit. 2. n. 38. It is true, Iustinian doth
appropriate the Probat of Wills to the
Master of his Revenue; but the Law and
Custom of England,
        Lindwood l. 3. de Testam. as Lindwood observes,
hath altered that Constitution:
and which must we regard more, Iustinian,
or our own Laws?
      I find one thing more suggested by way
of Prejudice to the Cause in hand, viz. 
the Common Law of England,
        Lett. p. 4. which
hath provided a Writ upon a Clergyman's
being chosen an Officer in a Mannor,
saying it was contra Legem & Consuetudinem
Regni, & non consonum. The
Argument had been altogether as good,
if it had been taken from a Minister of a

Parish not being capable of the Office of
Constable; and it had as effectually proved
that Clergy-men ought not to meddle
in secular Affairs. "
"4","CHAP. II. The Right in point of Law debated. Concerning
the Constitution of Clarendon,
and the Protestation 11 R. 2. HAving removed these general Prejudices,
I now come to debate more
closely the main Point. For the Authour
of the Letter undertakes to prove, that
Bishops cannot by Law give Votes in Capital
Cases in parliament. Lett. p. 68. Which he doth
two ways: 1. by statute-Law; 2. by Use
and Custome, which he saith is parliament-Law:
and for this he produceth many
Precedents. I. For statute-Law; two Ratifications,
he saith, there have been of it in
parliament; by the Constitutions of Clarendon,
and the 11 R. 2. 1. The Constitutions of Clarendon;
        Lett. p. 69. 
which he looks on as the more considerable,
because they were not the enacting of

new Laws, but a declaration of what was
before. And for the same Reason I value
them too, and shall be content this Cause
stand or fall by them. The Constitution in debate is the 11th,
which is thus repeated and translated in
the Letter. Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, &
universae Personae Regni qui de Rege tenent
in Capite, habeant possessiones suas de Rege,
sicut Baroniam, & inde Respondeant Iusticiariis
& Ministris Regis, & sequantur
& faciant omnes consuetudines Regias:
Et sicut ceteri Barones, debent interesse
judiciis Curie Regis, quousque perveniatur
ad diminutionem membrorum, vel
ad mortem. 
      The Archbishops, Bishops, and all the
dignified Clergy of the Land that hold of
the King in Capite, shall hold their possessions
from the King, as a Barony, and answer
for their estates unto the King's Iustices
and Ministers, and shall observe and obey
all the King's Laws: And together
with the other Barons, they are to be present
at all Iudgments in the King's Courts,
till it come to require either losse of Member
or Life. The Argument from hence he enforceth
from the solemn Recognition and publick
confirmation of these Constitutions,
        Lett. p. 71, 72. 
        
and the Oath taken to observe them;
from whence he concludes this to be Testimonium
irrefragabile, An irrefragable
and invincible Testimony. And so I foresee
it will prove, but to a quite contrary
purpose from what he intended it. The whole Question depends upon the
meaning of the latter Clause of this Constitution. 
The meaning he gives of it is
this,
        Lett. p. 61. 
        that the Prelats of the Church should
not be present at the Iudgments given in
the King's Courts when losse of Member or
Life was in question. The meaning of it I conceive to be
this, that the Bishops are required to be
present in the King's Courts as other Barons
are, till they come to give sentence
as to Dismembring, or loss of Life. Whether of these is the true meaning
is now to be considered: and that will
best be discovered these three ways. 1. By
the Occasion. 2. By the plain sense of
the words according to their true Reading. 
3. By the subsequent Practice upon
this Constitution in the parliament at
Northampton soon after. 1. By the Occasion. The Authour of
the Letter assigns that Occasion for this
Constitution, for which there is not the
least colour; viz. That the Prelats of that

time were ambitious of a kind of Omnipotency,Lett. p. 73. 
        (in Judicature I suppose he means,)
and that to restrain their power of Judging
Capital Cases this Constitution was
made: and because this seemed to be a
diminution of their Power, therefore
Matt. Paris ranks it among the Consuetudines
iniquas, the wicked Customs of the
former times. For all which there is not
the least shadow of Proof; besides that
it is so repugnant to the History of those
Times, that I can hardly believe a Person
of so much Learning and Judgment, as is
commonly said to be the Authour of the
Letter, could betray so much unskilfulness
in the Affairs of those Times. For
this is so far from being true, that the Bishops
did then affect such a Power of Iudging
in all secular Causes, that they looked
on their attendance in the King's Court in
the Trial of Causes, as a burthen which
they would fain have been rid of; because
they accounted it a Mark of subjection
to the Civil Power, and contrary to
that Ecclesiastical Liberty, or Independency
on Princes, which from the days
of Gregory VII. they had been endeavouring
to set up. Which H. II. being very
sensible of, resolved to tie them to the
service of their Baronies, and to an attendance

on the King's Courts together with
other Barons. But lest they should pretend
any force on their Consciences, as
to the Canons of the Church, this Constitution
doth not require, but suffers them
to withdraw, when they came to sentence
in matters of Bloud. And that this was
the true Occasion, I prove by these two
invincible Arguments. 1. By the complaint which they made
of the Baronies, as too great a mark of
subjection to the Civil Power. This is
plain from Matt. Paris
        Matt. Paris ad A. D. 1070. himself, to whom
the Authour of the Letter refers: for when
he speaks of William the Conquerour's bringing
the Temporalties of the Bishops into
the condition of Baronies, i. e. forcing
them to hold them of him in Chief upon
certain Duties and services, he calls it
Constitutionem pessimam, a most wicked
Constitution; just as he calls the Customs
of Clarendon Consuetudines iniquas, wicked
Customs. And he adds, that many were
banished rather then they would submit
to that Constitution. For their Privileges
were so great with the Frank-almoign they
enjoied in the saxon times, and their desires
so hearty (especially among the
Monks, who from Edgar's time had gotten
into most Cathedral Churches) to advance

the Papal Monarchy, that they rather
chose to quit all, then to give up
the Cause of the Churche's Liberty by accepting
of Baronies. Therefore Matt. 
Paris calls the Rolls that were made of
the services belonging to these Baronies,
Rotulas Ecclesiasticae servitutis, the Rolls
of Ecclesiastical slavery; then which nothing
could be more contrary to that Ecclesiastical
Liberty which was then setting
up by Pope Hildebrand. And to put
this out of all dispute, Petrus Blesensis, a
Name well known in this dispute, in that
very Book where he complains of the
Bishops Hypocrisy about Cases of Bloud, in
being present at hearing and trying Causes,
but going out at sentence, complains
likewise of their Baronies, as those
which gave occasion to that Hypocrisy,
and as the marks of the vilest slavery. 
        Pet. Bles. de Institut. Episc. p. 451. 
        Et
in occasione turpissimae servitutis seipsos Barones
appellant. They may think it an
honour to be called the King's Barons,
but he accounts it the greatest slavery;
and applies that place of scripture to them,
They have reigned, but not by me; they
are become Princes, and I know them not. 
Now Pet. Blesensis lived in the time of
H. II. and knew the whole proceedings
of the Constitutions of Clarendon, and was

a zealous maintainer of Becket's Cause, or,
which was all one, of the Liberties of the
Church, as they called them, against the
Civil Power. 
      2. By the fierce Contest between the
Civil and Ecclesiastical Power, about the
Liberties of Church-men. This was carried
on from the time that William I. 
brought them into subjection by their
Baronies: his sons stood upon the Rights
of the Crown; whilst Anselm and his Brethren
struggled all they could, but to little
purpose, till after the death of H. I. 
Then stephen, to gratifie the great Prelates,
by whose favour he came to the
Crown, yielded all they desired: but he
soon repented, and they were even with
him for it. Malmsbury takes particular
notice, that he yielded they should have
their Possessions free and absolute;
        Malmsbur. hist. Novell. p. 100. b. and
they promised onely a conditional Allegeance
to him, as long as he maintained
the Liberties of the Church. When K. stephen
broke the Canons, as they said, by
imprisoning 2 Bishops, the Bishop of Winchester
and his Brethren summoned him to
answer it before them in Council; and
there declared, that the King had nothing
to doe with Church-men, till the Cause
was first heard and determined by themselves. 

All his time, they had no regard
to his Authority, when it contradicted
their Wills: and when the Peace was
made between Him and H. II. Radulphus
de Diceto takes notice that the Power
of the Clergy increased by it. Rad. de Diceto Imag. histor. p. 509. 528. In this
state H. II. found things,Gul. Neuburg. l. 2. c. 16. when Gul. Neuburgensis
saith, the great business of the
Church-men was to preserve their Liberties. 
Upon this the great Quarrel between Him
and Becket began: this made the King
search what the Rights of the Crown were
which his Ancestours challenged; to these
he was resolved to make Becket and his
Brethren submit. For this purpose the
parliament was called at Clarendon, and
after great debates the 16 Constitutions
were produced; which were those the King
was resolved to maintain, and he made
the Bishops as well as others swear to observe
them. Now when the rest of them
relate to some Exemptions and Privileges
which the Church-men challenged to
themselves, about their Courts, Excommunications,
Appeals, and such like, and
which the King thought fit to restrain
them in; (From whence in Becket's Epistles
it is said,Bar. ad A. D. 1164. n. 3. those Constitutions were
framed ad ancillandam Ecclesiam, to bring
the Church in subjection, as Baronius shews

out of the Vatican Copy. And Fitz-stephen
        Fitz-stephen vit. Th. Beck. M s. 
saith, All the Constitutions of Clarendon
were for suppressing the Liberty of
the Church, and oppressing the Clergy: I
say, considering this,) is there not then
great Reason to understand this 11th. 
        Constitution after the same manner: viz. 
that notwithstanding K. stephen's Grant,
H. II. would make them hold by Baronies,
and doe all the service of Barons in
the King's Courts, as other Barons did;
and he would allow them no other Privilege,
but that of withdrawing when they
came to sentence in a Case of Bloud? What
is there in this sense, but what is easy and
natural, and fully agreeable to the state
of those Times? whereas there is not the
least foundation for the pretence of the
Bishops affecting to be present in all Causes,
which the King must restrain by this
Constitution. 
      This sense of it is not onely without
ground, but is absolutely repugnant to
all the History of that Age. For if this
Constitution was intended to restrain the
Bishops from trying Causes of Bloud, then
the Bishops did desire to be present in those
Causes, and the King would not suffer
them. Whereas it is evident that the Bishops
pretended scruple of Conscience from

the Canons, that they could not be present;
but in truth stood upon their Exemption
from the service of Barons,
which they called Ecclesiastical slavery. 
And therefore that could not be the sense
of the Constitution, to restrain them in that
which they desired to be freed from, and
which by this Constitution of Clarendon
was plainly forced upon them against
their wills. For Lanfranc had brought
the Canon of the 11th. 
        Council of Toledo
into England,
        spelm. Concil. To. 2. p. 8, 9, 11. 
        That no Bishop or Clergyman
should condemn a man to death, or
give vote in the sentence of Condemnation:
at which Council were present 2 Archbishops,
12 Bishops, and 21 Abbots. And
before H. II's time this Canon of Toledo
was received into the Body of the Canon-Law,
made by Ivo, Burchardus, Regino, and
Gratian who lived in the time of K. stephen:
and when they saw such a Canon
so generally received, is there not far
greater Reason to think they desired to
withdraw, then that they should press
to be present, and the King restrain them?
But the Constitution is so framed on purpose,
to let them understand, that the
King expected in all Iudgments they
should doe their Duty, as other Barons:
but lest they should think he purposely designed

to make them break the Canons,
he leaves them at liberty to withdraw when
sentence was to be given. so that I can
hardly doubt but the Authour of the Letter,
if he please calmly to reflect upon
the whole matter, will see reason to acknowledge
his mistake; and that this
Constitution was so far from intending to
restrain the Bishops from all Iudicature in
Cases of Bloud, that, on the contrary, it
was purposely framed to oblige them to
be present, and to act in such Causes as
the other Barons did, at least till the Cause
was ripe for sentence: which last Point
the King was content to yield to them,
out of regard and reverence to the Canons
of the Church. For the words of the
Law are not words of Prohibition and
restraint from any thing, but of Obligation
to a Duty; which was, to be present
and serve in the King's Courts of Iudicature,
in like manner as the other Barons
did. 
      From all which it is evident, I think,
beyond contradiction, that the Occasion
of this Law was not the Ambition of the
Prelates,
        P. 73. (as the Authour of the Letter
suggests) to thrust themselves into this
kind of Iudicature; but an Ambition of
a worse kind, (though quite contrary)

        viz. under a pretence of Ecclesiastical Liberty
and Privilege, to exempt themselves
from the service of the King and Kingdom,
to which by virtue of their Baronies
they were bound, sicut caeteri Barones, as
well as the other Barons. And therefore
it is so far from being true, that the Bishops
exercise of this Iurisdiction together
with the Temporal Lords is a Relique of
Popery, and one of the Encroachments of
the Clergy in those Times of Ignorance and
Usurpation, as some well-meaning Protestants
are now made to believe; that, on
the contrary, the Exemption of the Clergy
from this kind of secular Iudicature was
one of the highest Points of Popery, and
that which the Pope and his Adherents
contested for with more zeal then for any
Article of the Creed. This was one of
those Privileges which Thomas Becket
said Christ purchased for his Church with his
bloud, and in the obstinate defence whereof
against the King he himself at last lost
his life. And now to put the matter beyond
all doubt, I appeal to any man
skilled in the History of those Times, whether
Thomas Becket opposed the Constitutions
of Clarendon to the death, and
broke the Oath he had taken to observe
them, because by them (among other

things) the Bishops were excluded from
Iudicature in Cases of Bloud; or for the
quite contrary reason, (among others)
because this service of the King in his
Courts, imposed on them by virtue of
their Baronies, was looked upon by him
as a violation of the Privileges of the
Church, and a badge of Ecclesiastical slavery,
which by all means he desired to cast
off. And if the latter be the true Reason,
I leave it to the impartial Reader,
and even to the Authour of the Letter
himself upon second thoughts, whether
he have not widely mistaken both the
Occasion and Meaning of this Law. 2. Let us consider the plain sense of
the words according to the true reading
of them. The Authour of the Letter hath
made use of the most imperfect Copy, viz. 
that in Matt. Paris; I cannot tell for
what reason, unless it be that in the last
Clause [in Iudicio] is there left out,
which is put in in the Copy extant in Gervase,
and in the Vatican Copy, and in several
Mss. in all which it runs thus, Et
sicut Barones caeteri debent interesse judiciis
Curiae Regis cum Baronibus, usque perveniatur
in judicio ad diminutionem membrorum,
vel ad mortem. Now here are
two things to be distinguished. 
1. something expresly required of the
Bishops as to their presence in the King's
Courts, viz. that they must attend as other Barons,
and sit together with them: and therefore
it is expressed twice; Et sicut caeteri Barones,
in the beginning of that Clause, and
cum Baronibus, again after, and debent interesse,
in the middle. And can any one soberly
think, that the meaning of all this is, they
must not be present in cases of Bloud?
No: the Constitution saith, they ought to
be present as other Barons, and sit with other
Barons in the Trials of the King's
Courts. And yet the Authour of the Letter
doth (to speak mildly) very unfairly
represent this Constitution, as if it did forbid
the Prelats to be at all present in the
Iudgments of the King's Courts in Cases of
Bloud; and that in express words. For,
speaking of the Constitutions of Clarendon,
he hath this passage,pag. 61. 
        And one of these Constitutions
was, that the Prelats of the
Church should not interesse Iudiciis Curie
Regis, be present at the Iudgments given
in the Kings Courts. 
        Whereas
this Constitution (as he himself cites it
afterwards) runs thus, debent interesse
Iudiciis Curie Regis, quousque, &c. 
they ought to be present in the Iudgments
of the King's Courts, till it come to loss of

Members or Life. so that this Law expresly
says, that they ought to be present in
the Iudgments of the King's Courts, till it
come, &c. 
        And when it comes to loss
of Members or Life, it doth not say (as
the Authour of the Letter affirms) that
they should not be present then, nor do the
words of the Constitution imply any such
thing; but only require (as I shall evidently
make appear) their presence so
far; and when it should come to sentence,
leaves them at liberty to withdraw
in obedience to the Canons of the Church,
which they pretended themselves bound
in Conscience to observe. And this is
the true Reason why, among the 16 Constitutions
of Clarendon,
        Baronius ad Ann. 1164. (whereof 10 were
condemned, 6 tolerated, but none approved,
by Pope Alex. III. ) this 11. was one of
the 6 which escaped with an Hoc toleravit,
this the Pope was content to tolerate;
because in the last Clause of it there was
regard had to the Canons of the Church. 
Of this misrepresentation of the Constitution
under debate, though it might have
deserved a more severe animadversion, I
shall say no more, because I have no design
to provoke the Authour or any body
else, but onely to convince them. 2. something allowed to the Bishops as

peculiar to themselves, viz. That when
the Court hath proceeded so far in judicio,
in a particular Trial, (for before it is Iudiciis
in general) that sentence was to
be given either as to dismembring, or
loss of life, then they are at liberty; but
till then they are required. As, suppose
Charles V. had required the Protestant
Princes to attend him to Masse, as
other Princes did; onely when the Mass-Bell
tinckled they might withdraw;
would not any reasonable man understand
by this, that they were obliged to their Attendance
till then? so it is here: the King
commands their Attendance till it comes
to such a point; therefore before it comes
thither, their presence is plainly required
by this Constitution. And so in stead of
there being a statute-Law to exclude the
Bishops at such Trials, there is one to require
their presence in judicio, in the proceedings
of such a Trial, till it comes to
sentence. All that can be said in this
case is, that the last Clause is not to be understood
of the sentence, but of the Kind
or quality of the Cause; i. e. they are to be
present in the King's Courts, till they come
to a Cause wherein a man's Life or Members
are concerned. But that this cannot
be the meaning will appear. 
1. There is a great deal of difference
between quousque perveniatur ad judicium
mutilationis membrorum, vel mortis, that
might have been understood of a Cause of
Bloud; and quousque perveniatur in judicio
ad mutilationem membrorum, vel ad mortem,
for this supposeth a Trial already begun,
and the Bishops present so far in it; but
when it comes to the point of mutilation
or death, then they have leave to withdraw. 
so that this last Clause must either
be understood of Execution, which no one
can think proper for the King's Courts;
or for the sentence given by the Court,
which is most agreeable. 2. The sense is best understood by the
Practice of that Age. For, if the meaning
of the Constitution had been, they must
not be present in any Cause of Bloud, and
the Bishops had all sworn to observe it;
can we imagine we should find them practising
the contrary so soon after? And
for this I appeal to Petrus Blesensis,
        Pet. Bles. de Instit. Episc. p. 454. whose
words are so material to this purpose, that
I shall set them down. Principes sacerdotum
& seniores Populi, licèt non dictent
judicia sanguinis, eadem tamen tractant
disputando & disceptando de illis; séque
ideo immunes à culpa reputant, quòd mortis
aut truncationis membrorum judícium decernentes,

à pronuntiatione duntaxat & executione
poenalis sententiae se absentent. 
Whereby it is evident that the Bishops
were present at all Debates, and gave
Votes in Causes of Bloud; but they absented
themselves from the sentence, and the
Execution of it. It is true, Pet. Blesensis
finds fault with them for this. But what
is that to the Law, or to the practice of
that Age? I do not question, but Pet. 
Blesensis condemned the observation of
the other Constitutions of Clarendon, as well
as this; and in all probability this passage
of his was levelled at those Bishops who
did observe this 11. Constitution. 
      3. We have a plain way to understand
the meaning of this Constitution, by what
happened soon after in the parliament at
Northampton, which was summoned upon
Becket's Obstinacy and Contempt of the
King's Authority: where Fitz-stephen
saith, he was accused of Treason; and the
Bishops sate together with other Barons;
and because it did not come to a sentence
of Death, after great debate between
the other Lords and the Bishops about pronouncing
the sentence, the Bishop of
Winchester did it. Wherein we have as
plain evidence as can be desired, that the
Bishops did sit with the other Barons, and

        vote with them in a case of Treason. 
      To this Precedent the Authour of the
Letter answers several things. 1. That none of the ancient Historians
of those Times say any thing of his being accused
of Treason:Lett. p. 60. 
        and therefore he thinks
one may modestly affirm,pag. 62. that it was a mistake
in Fitz-stephen to say so. But what
if H. II. and Becket himself both confess
that he was charged with Treason?Vol. Epistol. Becket in Bibl. Cotton. Ms. l. 1. ep. 65. 
        H. II. 
in his Letter to Reginaldus saith, that by
consent of his Barons and Clergy he had
sent Ambassadours to Pope Alexander,
with this Charge, that if he did not free
him from that Traitour Becket, he and his
Kingdom would renounce all Obedience to
him. And Becket did not think this a
bare term of reproach; for in one of his
Letters he saith, that defending the Liberties
of the Church laesae Majestatis reatus
sub persecutore nostro est,Ep. 52. 
        was looked on
as Treason by the King. 
        Gervas. Chronic. p. 1391. 
        And even Gervase
himself, to whom the Authour of the
Letter appeals, saith, some of his friends
came to him at Northampton, and told
him, if he did not submit to the King, he
would be proceeded against as a Traitour,
for breaking the Allegeance he had promised
to the King, when he did swear to observe
the ancient Customs at Clarendon. And
        
Fitz-stephen saith,
        Fitz-stephen Vit. Th. Becket. de Concilio apud Clarendon. the King's Council at
Clarendon said it was Treason, or taking
the King's Crown from his head, to deny
him the Rights of his Ancestours. 2. That it was a strange kind of Treason
Becket was charged with at Northampton,
        Lett. p. 63. 
        viz. for not coming when the King
sent for him; which at the most was onely
a high Contempt; and Fitz-stephen, who
was a Creature of the Archbishop's, might
represent it so, to draw an odium on the
King. And therefore he looks on this as
a weak precedent for the Bishops to lay any
weight upon, being at best out of a blind
Ms. of an Authour justly suspected of partiality,
against the tenour of all the ancient
Writers that give an account of the same business. 
What truth there is in this last
suggestion appears in part already, and
will do more by what follows. Must all
the unprinted Records be answered with
saying they are blind Mss? I cannot
but take notice how unreasonable a way
of answering this is. It is like turning of
that pressing Instance, of the Bishops making
a Proctor in Capital Cases, by saying
it was Error temporis;
        pag. 79. which because it
will answer all Instances whatsoever as well
as that, is therefore an answer to none. 
Just so it is equally an answer to all Mss,
        
to say they are blind; and to all printed
Books too, because they were once Mss,
and, for any thing that appears to the
contrary, as blind as Fitz-stephen's. For
surely no authority is added to a Book by
its being printed; unless in the opinion
of the common people, who are said to
take all for true that is in Print. I do
not go about to parallel Fitz-stephen with
parliament-Rolls; but I say, his Authority
is very good, being present upon the
place, and the best we have, of all the
proceedings in the parliament at Northampton. 
And if the Authour of the Letter
had taken the pains to peruse him, he
would not have contemned the Precedent
drawn from thence; which being so near
the parliament at Clarendon, (that, as
himself confesseth,pag. 61. the one was in February,
the other in October following,)
it gives the best Light into this matter of
any thing in that Age; and being not
yet fully printed, it will be worth our
while to set it down. Mr. selden hath
indeed printed very exactly the Proceedings
of the first Iudgment upon Becket,
        Titles of Honour, p. 2. c. 5. n. 20. 
about the Cause of Contempt, for not
coming upon the King's summons, at the
complaint of Iohn the Marshall; wherein
the Bishops did certainly sit in Iudgment
        
upon him with the other Barons: but
there is a farther strength in this Precedent,
not yet taken notice of. Which
is, that after this Iudgment passed, Becket
behaved himself with so great insolency
towards the King and the Bishops, upon
the King's calling him to farther account,
for many other things laid to his
Charge, as diverting the King's Treasure,
and applying it to his own use, and great
Accounts to the King while he was Chancellour,
&c. that the King required him to
stand to the Iudgment of his Court. Becket
gave a dilatory Answer: the King summons
the Bishops, and Earls and Barons,
to give Iudgment against him: the Bishops
tell the King, Becket had appealed to
the Pope, and prohibited them to give any
farther Judgment upon any secular
Complaint against him. Whereupon the
King sent some Earls and Barons to him,
to expostulate the matter, since he was
the King's subject, and had so lately sworn
to the Constitutions at Clarendon; and to
know whether he would give security to
the King about making up his Accounts,
and stand to the Judgment of his Court. 
Becket refuseth to give answer to any
thing, but the Cause of Iohn the Marshall,
for which he was summoned to appear;

slights his Oath, as contrary to the Rights
of the Church, and confirms his Appeal to
the Pope. And such an owning of the
Pope's Power, in derogation to the Rights
of the Crown, sir Edward Cook saith was
Treason by the ancient Common Law, before
any statutes were made. However, the
King charges the Bishops by virtue of
their Allegeance, that, together with the
Barons, they would give Iudgment upon
the Archbishop. They excused themselves
on the account of the Archbishop's
Prohibition. The King replied, That
had no force against the Constitution of
Clarendon, so lately made and acknowledged
by them. The words of Fitz-stephen
are these: Rex, responso Archiepiscopi
accepto, instat Episcopis, praecipiens
& obtestans per homagium & fidelitatem
sibi debitam & juratam, ut simul cum Baronibus
de Archiepiscopo sibi dictent sententiam. 
Illi se excusare coeperunt per interpositam
Archiepiscopi Prohibitionem. Rex
non acquievit, asserens, quòd non teneat
haec ejus simplex Prohibitio contra hoc quod
Clarendonae factum & initum fuerat. so
that H. II. in the parliament at Northampton
declared, that Bishops were bound,
by virtue of the Constitution of Clarendon,
to be present, and to give their Votes in

cases of Treason. And the Bishops' did not
deny this, but used prudential arguments
to disswade the King from proceeding
any farther, the Appeal being made; and
that it was for the good of King and
Kingdom, for them to submit to the
Prohibition. And the Bishop of Chichester
told Becket, he made them go against
the Constitutions of Clarendon, which they
had so lately sworn to observe; in these
remarkable words; Quo contra nos venire
compellitis, interdicendo, nè ei quod de
nobis exigit adesse possumus Iudicio. By
which we see this Constitution is indeed
an irrefragable Testimony; but it is to
prove that Bishops are bound to be present
even in Cases of Treason, when the King
summons them. And as to the case of
Becket's Treason, the same Bishop told him,
it lay in breaking his Oath about those
Constitutions, wherein the Rights of
the Crown were declared. And if this be
not Treason by the Common Law, sir Edward
Cook's Preface to his fifth Book of
Reports signifies nothing. The late Authour of the Peerage and
Iurisdiction of the Lords spirituall
takes it for granted,pag. 14. that by the Constitution
of Clarendon the Iurisdiction
of Bishops was limited, that it should

not extend ad diminutionem membrorum,
vel ad mortem. But the foregoing discourse
hath, I suppose, made it evident,
that those words contain no Limitation,
but a Privilege or Indulgence to them
with respect to the Canon-Law. And he
takes very needless pains to prove this to
be declarative of the Common Law; and
that the Meeting at Clarendon was a full
parliament: which are very much besides
the business. All that looks towards this matter, is,
that he saith, this statute was confirmed
by a Council at Westminster; for which
he cites Rog. Hoveden's Authority. But I
wish he had produced the Canon entire as
he there found it; for then the sense of it
would have been better understood. In
this synod at Westminster, Richard Archbishop
of Canterbury produceth several
ancient Canons, which he thought fit to
be observed here. Among the rest, he
mentions that of the Council of Toledo. 
The words are these: His qui in sacris
Ordinibus constituti sunt, judicium sanguinis
agitare non licet; here he makes his
&c. and leaves out the Prohibition which
declares the meaning and extent of
this Canon: Vnde prohibemus, nè aut per
se membrorum truncationes faciant, aut

inferendas judicent; Wherefore we forbid
them, either to dismember any persons themselves,
or to give Iudgment for the doing of
it. Both which were practised in spain
in the time of the Council of Toledo, which
was the occasion of this Canon. And
then follows the sanction of Deprivation
if men did otherwise. And what now
doth this signifie more to the Constitution
of Clarendon, then that the same Canons
were now revived, which gave the occasion
to that permission of withdrawing,
when the sentence came to be pronounced
as to dismembring, or loss of Life?
      But he urges farther about this Constitution,
        pag. 18. 
that it must be so understood, as
to exclude the Bishops from all antecedent
and praeliminary things which do relate
or tend ad diminutionem, &c. or else,
saith he, it must be onely the exemption of
the Prelats from doing the Office of Executioners,
which is Non-sense. Why so?
though it be not the whole sense of the
Canon, yet surely it is sense. But he
might have thought of giving sentence,
which the Canons forbid, and is different
from Execution, and doth not exclude
the Bishops presence at Praeliminaries. 
The Constitution of Westminster, he saith,
is plainer, Non debent agitare judicium sanguinis;
        
which, he saith, excludes the exercise
of any Judicial Power in Cases of
Bloud. Whereas it appears by the Prohibition
there extant, nothing is forbidden
but giving sentence; at which the
Constitution of Clarendon allows them to
withdraw. 2. The second time we are told that the
Exclusion of the Bishops in Cases Capital rereived
a Confirmation in parliament,Lett. p. 73. was
the 11. of R. II. When the Archbishop and
the other Bishops, upon their withdrawing
then from the parliament, in regard matters
of Bloud were there to be agitated and
determined, in quibus non licet alicui eorum
personaliter interesse, as they say,
in which it was not lawfull for any of
them to be present in person, did therefore
enter a Protestation, with a salvo to
their Right of sitting and Voting in that
and all other parliaments, when such matters
were not in Question: which Protestation
of theirs was at their desire enrolled in
full parliament by the King's Command,
with the Assent of the Lords Temporal
and Commons. so that it is here said
to be a perfect and compleat Act of parliament;
and if it had not been a Law before,
would then have been made one. This is
the substance of what is more largely insisted

on in another place;
        •. 19▪ &c. 
        and what
strength is there added shall be duely considered. 
      To understand this business aright, it
will be necessary to set down the Protestation
it self at large, as it is taken out of
Courtney's Register,Rot. Parl. 11 R. 2. n. 9. and the parliament-Rolls;
and then examine the Points that
do arise from thence. The Protestation
runs thus. In Dei nomine Amen. Cùm de jure &
consuetudine Regni Angliae, ad Archiepiscopum
Cantuariensem, qui pro tempore fuerit,
necnon caeteros suos suffraganeos, Confratres
& Coëpiscopos, Abbatésque & Priores,
aliosque Praelatos quoscunque, per Baroniam
de Domino Rege tenentes, pertineat
in parliamentis Regis quibuscunque, ut
Pares Regni praedicti, personaliter interesse,
ibidémque de Regni Negotiis, & aliis ibidem
tractari consuetis, cum caeteris dicti
Regni Paribus, & aliis ibidem jus interessendi
habentibus, consulere, tractare, ordinare,
statuere, & diffinire, ac caetera
facere quae parliamenti tempore ibidem imminent
facienda; in quibus omnibus &
singulis, Nos Willielmus Cantuar. Archiepiscopus,
totius Angliae Primas, & Apostolicae
sedis Legatus, pro nobis, nostrisque
suffraganeis, Coëpiscopis, & Confratribus,

bus, nec non Abbatibus, Prioribus, ac Praelatis
omnibus supradictis, protestamur, &
eorum quilibet protestatur, qui per se, vel
per Procuratorem hîc fuerit modò praesens,
publicè & expressè, quòd intendimus, &
intendit, volumus, ac vult quilibet eorum,
in hoc praesenti parliamento, & aliis, ut
Pares Regni praedicti, more solito interesse,
consulere, tractare, ordinare, statuere, &
diffinire, accaetera exercere, cum caeteris jus
interessendi habentibus in eisdem, statu &
ordine nostris & eorum cujuslibet in omnibus
semper salvis. Verùm quia in praesenti
parliamento agitur de nonnullis materiis in
quibus non licet nobis, aut alicui eorum,
juxta sacrorum Canonum instituta quomodolibet
personaliter interesse, ea propter
pro nobis & eorum quolibet protestamur,
& eorum quilibet hîc praesens etiam protestatur,
quòd non intendimus, nec volumus,
sicuti de jure non possumus, nec debemus,
intendit, nec vult aliquis eorundem, in praesenti
parliamento, dum de hujusmodi materiis
agitur, vel agetur, quomodolibet interesse;
sed nos, & eorum quemlibet, in ea
parte penitùs absentare, jure Paritatis &
cujuslibet eorundem interessendi in dicto
parliamento, quoad omnia & singula mihi
exercenda, nostris & eorum cujuslibet statu
& ordine congruentia, in omnibus semper

salvo. Ad haec insuper protestamur, &
eorum quilibet protestatur, quòd propter hujusmodi
absentiam, non intendimus, nec
volumus, nec eorum aliquis intendit vel
vult, quòd processus habiti & habendi in
praesenti parliamento super materiis antedictis,
in quibus non possumus, nec debemus,
ut premittitur, interesse, quantum
ad nos & eorum quemlibet attinet, futuris
temporibus quomodolibet impugnentur, infirmentur,
seu etiam infringentur. This Protestation, setting aside the legal
Formalities of it, consists of 3 parts. 
1. A Declaration of their undoubted
Right as Peers of the Realm, by virtue of
their Baronies, to sit and Vote in all Debates
of parliament. 2. Of their intention
to withdraw this parliament, because
several matters were to be handled, at
which it was not lawfull for them, according
to the Canons, to be present. 3. That
by this absenting themselves they did not
intend, as far as concerned them, to null
the proceedings of that parliament. 
      Here now arise three main Points to be
discussed. 1. Upon what Grounds the Prelats declared,
it was not lawfull for them to
be present in parliament, at such matters?
2. How far the parliament's receiving
that Protestation makes it a Law?
      3. Whether on supposition it were a
part of Canon-Law then in force, it continues
so still since the Reformation?
      1. Upon what Grounds they declared it
unlawfull for them to be present in parliament,
at such matters? One would
think the very reading the Protestation
were sufficient to convince any man; for
the Bishops declare as plainly as men could
do, that it was out of regard to the Canons
of the Church, and not from any Law
of the Land. For how was it possible
that the same men should declare, that
by reason of their Baronies they had full
Right to be personally present in all Debates
of parliament, if there were some
Law in force which made it unlawfull for
them to be personally present? The
greater force there is in the Protestation's
being received in parliament, the greater
strength there is in this Argument. For
if the Protestation's being allowed by
King, Lords and Commons, make it (as
the Authour of the Letter affirms) a perfect
and compleat Law, then their Right
to be present in all Debates of parliament
is a Law; and so much the more considerable,
because it is no enacting Law,

making that to be so, which was not before,
but declarative of what was confessed
to be their undoubted Right by King,
Lords and Commons. And therefore I do
not wonder, that the Authour of the Letter,
so conveniently to his purpose, left
out all the beginning of the Protestation,
which so fully clears the sense of the rest. 
For the very same thing which afterwards
the Bishops say they are forbid to doe by
the Canons, that is, personaliter interesse,
to give their personal attendance, they say
at first, by Right of their Peerage, as Barons
by tenure, did belong to them; for
there the words are personaliter interesse
too. Therefore that personal attendance
in such matters which they said was unlawfull
to them by the Canons, they challenge
to themselves as their just Right by
virtue of their Baronies. But is it possible
to imagine, if they had been precluded
from sitting by any antecedent Law,
that ever such a publick avowing their
Right would have passed the King and
both Houses? so unsuccessfull hath the
Authour of the Letter been in his statute-Laws,
that there can be no stronger evidence
of the Bishops Right to sit in such
Cases, then those which he produceth against
them. 
But he goes about to prove this Prohibition
cannot be understood onely of the
Canon-Law:
        Lett. p. 21, 22. 
        for the Canon-Law, saith he,
was to them above all Laws; and what was
forbidden by that Law, they could not have
a thought, that it could in any sort be lawfull
for them to challenge as their Right, upon
any account. I confess I can see no force
in this Reasoning: For when a thing is
forbidden to men meerly by a positive Law
of the Church, and the penalty of it is bare
Irregularity by the Canons; why may not
such men challenge their own Right notwithstanding
those Canons, because the
Irregularity might be dispensed with,
when the Pope saw convenient? And by
the Constitutions of O•hobon,
        Const. Othob. c. Nè Clerici. 
        which were
made in the time of H. III. we find, that
if an Inferiour Clergy-man transgressed
this Canon, it was in the power of the
Diocesan to absolve him from his Irregularity. 
And this Canon was received
and inforced most here in England on the
inferiour Clergy, as appears by the Canons
of stephen Langton in the Council of
Oxford,
        spelman. Conc. To. 2. p. 183. p. 451. and other synodall Constitutions
here. Lyndwood ad tit. de Loc. & cond. c. vendentes. si quis Clericus. For it is a Rule in Lyndwood, Clericus
ex vi verbi non comprehendit Episcopum,
sed cum adjuncto, sic in quantum illud
adjunctum potest concernere Episcopum. 
        
That by Clerici we are not to understand
Bishops, unless there be some adjunct that
implieth it. Decretal. l. 3. tit. 50. c. 5. And among the Decretals there
is one from Alexander III. to the Archbishop
of Canterbury, under the Title Nè Clerici,
to the same purpose. Where the Glosse,
I grant, comprehends Prelats; therefore
I will not deny, but they were to be irregular
by the Canon-Law, as well as others. 
But then, we are to consider,
how far the Legatine Power vested in the
Archbishop of Canterbury might extend
in such a Case; and that there was the
same severity in the Canons against Clergymen's
taking upon them any secular Office:
and yet in this very parliament,
Thomas Arundell Bishop of Ely was Lord
Chancellour, and after him William of Wickham
Bishop of Winchester, and before
them R. Baybroke Bishop of London; and
the Bishops of Durham and Exceter were
Lords Treasurers under R. II. and in H. III's
time we find 3 Clergy-men Lords Chief
Iustices, Pateshull, Lovell and Mansell,
notwithstanding these Canons; and in
Edward III's time almost all the great Offices
of the Court were executed by Clergymen. 
By which we see they did not
think themselves so strictly bound to observe
those Canons; or it was so easy to be

dispensed with, that they had great Reason
to insist upon the challenge of their
own Right, notwithstanding the Canon-Law. 
      The truth is, the Canon-Law, as it was
managed in those days, was one of the
most mysterious pieces of Ecclesiasticall
Policy: it was an Engine, which the artificial
Church-men could screw up or let
down as they pleased. If it were in a
matter likely to be prejudicial to their interest,
(as it was most apparently the case
in 11 R. II. when matters grew so high
between R. II. and the powerfull Lords,
and so many Favourites were to be impeached,
and among them Alexander
Archbishop of York,) then it was a time
to quote the Canons, and to enter a Protestation,
and to withdraw: If the Times
were calmer and more settled, or some
great Reason moved them, then they
could stick to their Right of Peerage,
and make use of it, either in Person, or by
Proxy, as they thought convenient. Nor
was it so easy a matter to resolve what
was Canon-Law in England, but they
might with some colour make use of either
of these Pleas. 
        Rot. Parlam. 11 R. 2. p. 1. n. 26. For in this very parliament
11 R. II. the Commons desire that those
may be reputed Traitours who brought

in the Pope's Bulls of Volumus & Imponimus:
which shews that they did not
think all Canon-Law that passed for such
at Rome. And 15 R. II. sir Will. Brian
was sent to the Tower, for bringing a
Bull from Rome which was judged prejudicial
to the King, and derogatory to
his Laws. And in 16 R. II. Will. Courtney,
Archbishop of Canterbury, (the same who
entered the Protestation before mentioned,)
makes another of a different kind,
owning the Rights of the Crown in opposition
to the Pope's Encroachments. 
Now, by the same Reason, no Canon
made at Rome, no Legatine or synodal
Constitutions, could have any force against
the King's Authority. But the
King himself being under a force at that
time, as he alwaies declared afterwards,
and that being,Knighton p. 2701. as Knighton saith it
was called, parliamentum sine Misericordia,
the King having tied himself up, not
to pardon any without consent of the
Lords; he might be willing to let the
Bishops excuse themselves; because that
might give some colour to call in question
the Proceedings then, as it did 21 R. II. 
when all the Acts of this parliament were
nulled: and the Lords and Commons
might be very willing to let the Bishops
        
withdraw, that their business might proceed
with less difficulty against all the
King's Ministers. so that here was a
concurrence of many circumstances, which
made the Bishops think fit not to appear
in the House, this parliament; and the
King, Lords and Commons to be willing
to receive their Protestation. But in the
Anti-parliament to this, that I mean
21 R. II. the Commons pray the King,
that since divers Iudgments were undone
heretofore, for that the Clergy were not present,
they might appoint some Common
Proctor with sufficient Authority to that
purpose. This is a Passage which deserves
consideration, and tends very much to
clear the whole matter. For the House of Commons declare, that
divers Iudgments had been undone for
want of the Presence of the Clergy. Therefore
their Concurrence, in the judgment
of the House of Commons, was thought
necessary to make a Iudgment valid. A
very late Authour finds himself so perplexed
with this, that he knows not how to
get off from it. A Discourse of the Peerage and Jurisdiction of the Lords spiritual, p. 26. He cannot deny this to
be in the Rolls of parliament, and to be
the first Petition of the Commons: but
then he blames them for rashness and errour,
and want of due Examination of

        Precedents. As though it were possible
for any man now, to understand the
Law and Practice better then the whole
House of Commons then did. He saith,
they were mistaken palpably de facto, in
saying that divers Iudgments have been
heretofore undone; and yet presently confesseth,
that the two Iudgments against
the two spencers were reversed for this
Cause; but he saith, there are no more to
be found. Where doth he mean? in his
study? or not now extant in the parliament-Rolls?
But have we all the Rolls
of parliament that were then in being? or
must men so boldly charge the House of
Commons with Ignorance, Errour, breaking
the Laws, because they speak against
their fancies? But this Gentleman very
peremptorily concludes the House of Commons
then guilty of a very strange and unaccountable
Oversight. It is great pity,
a certain Gentleman had not been there
to have searched Records for them, and
to have informed them better. But we
think a Iudgment of the whole House of
Commons in such a Case, declared in so
solemn a manner, without the least contradiction
from the King or the Lords,
might deserve a little more respect; and
it had certainly had it, if it had made for

the other side. But we see the House of
Commons it self is reverenced, or not, as
the Judgment of it serves mens purposes. 
And yet this was more then the bare Iudgment
of the House of Commons: for a
Petition was made upon it, and that Petition
granted; and consequently a Common
Proctor appointed, and that Proctor
allowed by King, Lords and Commons. 
so that this was a Judgment ratified by
consent of the King and the whole parliament. 
For, if a Petition were made
on a false ground, what had been more
proper, then for the Lords to have opened
this to the Commons, and to have
told them how unadvised and false their
Iudgment was? whereas the Lords consented,
and the Proctor was admitted,
and gave his Vote in the name of the Clergy. 
But there is something more to confirm
this Iudgment of the Commons, and
that is, the parliament 11 R. II. making
Petition to the King, that all Iudgments
then given might be approved, affirmed
and stablished, as a thing duely made for
the Weal and Profit of the King our sovereign
Lord, notwithstanding that the Lords
spiritual and their Procurators were absent
at the time of the said Iudgments given. 
What means this Petition, if there had

been no doubt at that time, that these
Judgments might be reversed, as not
duely made, by reason of the absence of
the Prelats? The onely answer in my
mind is, that it was Error Temporis, they
were of that mind then, but some are resolved
to be of another now. But from hence we plainly see, that
even in R. II's time the Concurrence of
the Bishops was thought so necessary, that
one parliament declared Iudgments had
been reversed for want of it; and that very
parliament wherein they absented
themselves, got a Clause inserted on purpose
to prevent the nulling of those Iudgments:
which signified nothing to the
parliament 21 R. II. which reversed them
all. There is something more considerable
to our purpose in this parliament; viz. 
that the same Authour produceth the Testimony
of a Ms. Chronicle,
        Discourse of the Peerage, &c. p. 20. which largely
handles the Affairs of that parliament,
wherein it is confessed, that the Bishops,
by concurring with the Lords in the Revocation
of the Earl of Arundel's Pardon,
did give Vote in a Case Capital: for so the
words are there cited, Dederunt ergo locum
Praelati judicio sanguinis in hoc
facto. Which shews that the Bishops did

then give their Votes about the validity
of the Pardon: which the Authour of that
Chronicle indeed condemns them for, and
tells us some thought they incurred Irregularity
by it. From whence it follows,
that all the Penalty supposed to be incurred
was onely Canonical; but he never
charges them with going against the Law
or Custom of parliament therein. But the Authour of the Letter saith,Lett. p. 30. 
        Whatever was done this parliament signifies
nothing, because the whole parliament
stands repealed by 1 H. IV. and all done in
it delcared null and void. Yet, to our
comfort,p. 79. the same Authour tells us, the
three Henry's were Usurpers; and therefore
I desire to be satisfied, whether an
Vsurper, by a parliament of his calling,
can null and repeal what was done by a
King and his parliament. If he may,
then the King lost his Title to the Crown
by the late Vsurpers; if not, then the
parliament 21 R. II. could not be repealed
by that 1 H. IV. If the Authour of the
Letter had considered this, he is a Person
of too great Judgment and Loyalty, to
have mentioned, more then once, the Repeal
of that parliament,
        Lett. p. 8•. pag. 115. by the subsequent
parliament 1 H. IV. From all this we see, that by the Judgment

of the whole parliament, both 11 R. II. 
and 21 R II. the Bishops had a right to
sit, so far that Iudgments were reversed
where they were not present; and therefore
all the pretence they could have for
withdrawing must be from the Canon-Law:
which although not sufficient to
bind them, if the matter had been contested,
yet it served them for a very colourable
pretence of absenting themselves
in such dangerous times, as those of
11 R. II. Here the Authour of the Peerage and
Iurisdiction of the Lords spiritual thinks
he brings seasonable relief to the Cause,
        pag. 19. 
when he undertakes to prove, that the
Bishops withdrawing was not meerly on
the account of the Canon-Law. This, I
confess, is home to the business, If he
can make it out. (1. ) He saith, there
was an Act of parliament before, that did
expresly prohibit them to excercise Iurisdiction
in those Cases. This we utterly
deny. And the Constitution of Clarendon,
to which he refers, proves the contrary. 
(2. ) The Bishops made bold with the Canons
when they thought fit,p 20. as 21 R. II. 
But how could they doe that, unless they
had a parliamentary Right to be present?
He saith, the Constituting a Proxy was as

great a violation of the Canons, as being
personally present: and what then? therefore
the parliament would not have suffered
them to doe that, if there had been a
Law to exclude them. How doth this
prove that the Bishops did not withdraw
on the account of the Canons II R. II. 
because they made a Proxie 21 R. II?
But why did they not appear personally,
if they had no regard to the Canons;
when the receiving their Proxie shewed
they had a legal Right to appear? But
he grievously mistakes the meaning of the
Canon of stephen Langton in Lyndwood,
when he interprets Literas pro poena sanquinis
instigenda scribere vel dictare, against
making of Proxies; which is onely
meant of giving or writing the sentence
for Execution. 
        p. 21. (3. ) He saith, they were
excluded by ancient Custom; which, by
a very subtle way of reasoning, he proves
to have been part of the Fundamental
Contract of the Nation, as he speaks. seeing
then, saith he, it is without doubt that
there was such a Custom, that the Prelats
should not exercise Iurisdiction in Capital
Cases; (not so altogether without doubt,
unless it were better proved then we
have yet seen it;) and there is no Record
that doth mention when it did begin,

nor any time when it could be said there
never was such an Vsage; (yes, before the
Council of Toledo being published in spain,
and received here;) it must of necessity
be supposed, that it is as ancient as the
Government it self, and part of the Fundamental
Contract of the Nation. Which
looks so like a Iesuitical Argument, that
one would have thought he had been
proving Transubstantiation by it. For
just thus the Argument runs at this day
among that Party; There was a time when
it was recieved, and no time can be instanced
in wherein it was not, therefore
it was a part of the Fundamental Religion
of Iesus Christ. the plain Answer in
both cases is the same: If we can produce
unquestionable Authority to which a
Doctrine or Practice is repugnant, we
are not obliged to assign any punctual
time in which it must first come in. But
in this case, we do assign the very time
and occasion of the Bishops absenting
themselves in Capital Iudgments, and
that was from the receiving the Canon of
the Council of Toledo here: For no such
practice can ever be proved before. And
therefore this can never be proved to be
any part of the ancient Common Law of
England. And that this came in by way

of imitation of other Countries, appears
by the citing the Council of Toledo both
by Lanfranc and Richard in the Council of
Winchester. 
        pag. 23. (4. ) He saith, the Practice is
ancienter then any of the Canons of the
Church. But how doth that appear?
The eldest Canon he can find is that of
stephen Langton in Lyndwood, which was
made above 50 years after the parliament
at Clarendon. But we have made it evident,
there was a Canon received here in
Lanfranc's time, long before the Constitution
of Clarendon. And so a full Answer
is given to these Objections. But we are told, by the Authour of the
Letter, that the Bishops Protestation being
received and entered in the Roll, or
Iournal-Book, makes it to pass for a Law,
it being agreed to by the King and two
Houses; so as whatever was the Law before,
if it were onely the Canon-Law, it
is now come to be the Law and Rule of
parliament, and the Law of the Land. 
      2. This is therefore the second Point
to be examined, Whether the receiving
this Protestation amounts to a Law of
Exclusion? which it can by no means do
for these two Reasons: 1. from the nature
of Protestations in general, 2. from
the particular nature of this Protestation. 
      
1. From the nature of Protestations in
general. For a Protestation is onely a
Declaration of their minds that make it,
and not of theirs who receive it, or
suffer it to be entered in the Acts or Records
of the Court; unless it be received in
such a manner, as implies their consent. 
For, the very next parliament after this,
13 R. II. the two Archbishops, in the name
of the whole Clergy, enter a Protestation,
That they gave no assent to any Law or statute
made in restraint of the Pope's Authority;
and it is said in the Rolls of parliament,
that at their requests these Protestations were
enrolled. Will any man hence inferre,
that these Protestations were made Acts
of parliament? If the Cause would have
born any better, a Person of so much
skill in proceedings of parliament would
never have used such an Argument as
this. Besides, it is a Rule in Protestations,
        sum. l. 1. de Constit. n 18. pag. 24. 
        si Protestatio in Iudicio fiat, semper per
contrarium actum tollitur, saith Hostiensis;
A Protestation, although allowed in Court,
is taken off by a subsequent Act contrary to it. 
Which shews, that a Protestation can never
have the force of a Law; because it may
be destroied by the Act of the Parties
themselves. If therefore the Bishops did
afterwards act contrary to this Protestation,
        
they took away all the force of it. 2. The particular nature of this Protestation
is such, as doth most evidently
preserve their Right to be personally present
on the account of their Peerage and
Baronies; and the great design of a Protestation
is, to preserve a Right notwithstanding
some Act which seems to destroy
it; as thier absenting themselves on the
account of the Canons might seem to doe. 
But of this already. 3. We are now to consider the third
Point, Whether, on supposition that on
the account of the Canon-Law, the Bishops
had always withdrawn in the time of Popery,
that had continued in force still
since the Reformation? I think not,
upon these Reasons. 1. Because the Canon-Law was founded
upon a superstitious fancy, viz. that
if Clergy-men be present in Causes of Bloud,
they contract Irregularity ex defectu perfectae
Lenitatis,
        Man•al. c. 27. as the excellent Canonist,
Navarr, saith, because it argues a want
of perfect Lenity. But if we consider the
cases they allow, which do not incurre
Irregularity, and those they do not allow,
which do incurre it, we shall find all this
stir in the Canon-Law about this matter to
be onely a superstitious kind of Hypocrisy. 
1. If a man in Orders gives another
man Weapons, without which he could
not defend himself, and by those weapons
he maims him that assaulted him;
this doth not make him irregular: but if
he kills him, it doth: and yet the Canons
make the case of Dismembring and
Death the same. 2. It makes a man act against the Law
or Nature to prevent Irregularity. For
they say, if it be for the defence of Father
or Mother, or preventing the ruin of
his Country, although the Cause be never
so just, a Clergy-man that dismembers, or
takes away another's life, is irregular. 
      3. If a Clergy-man discovers Treason,
or accuses another for Treason, without
a Protestation, that he doth not doe it
with a design to have him punished; he
is irregular: but if he makes that Protestation,
although death follows, he is
not. 4. If a Clergy-man be in an Army, and
perswades the souldiers to fight manfully,
and kill as many as they can; this doth
not make him irregular; ny, although
he beats them, if they will not fight:
but if he happens to kill an enemy himself,
then he is. 5. If he gives a souldier a sword or a

Gun, by which he dispatches his enemies,
if he did it with a particular intention
that he should slay or maim them,
he is irregular; if onely with a general
intention, that he should overcome, he
is not. This being somewhat a nice
Case, the Canonists take more then usual
pains to prove it. And from hence they
defend their Priests and Iesuits in the Indies,
who carry the Cross before their
Armies into the Field, and encourage
them to kill all they can: and yet Navarr
saith, they are so far from being
irregular, that they are regularissimi, as
his word is. 6. If a man, to gain an Indulgence,
carries a faggot to burn an Heretick, if it
be with a design to take away his life, he
is irregular: but if he be hanged first, or
dead before it be thrown into the fire,
then he is not. 7. If a man in Orders helps a Chirurgeon
in cutting off a man's Leg, he is not
irregular: but if a man be justly condemned
to have his Leg cut off, if he
then gives any assistence, he is irregular:
because the one is moved out of Mercy,
and the other out of Justice. 8. If the Bishops sit and condemn a
man for Heresy, and deliver him over to

the secular Power for Execution; yet
they free this from Irregularity, or else
the practice of the Inquisition were lost. 
This seems a very difficult Case: but the
Canonists salve this,Covarruv. ad Clem. fi surios. p. 2. § 5. n. 6. by saying that the
Inquisitours, when they deliver them
over to the secular Power, do pray that
they may not be hurt either Wind or Lim;
as it appears by the Forms used in the
Directorium Inquisitorum. And if this be
not the height of Hypocrisie, let the
World judge. And therefore this part
of the Canon-Law is not consistent with
the sincerity of the Reformation. 
      2. This part of Canon-Law is inconsistent
with the King's Power over Ecclesiastical
Persons. For it supposeth them
liable to the penalty of a Law, which he
hath no cognisance of, and derives no
force or authority from him: which tends
to the diminution of the King's Prerogative
Royal, and therefore it is nulled by
the stat. 25▪ H. VIII. c. 19. I do very
much question whether this ever were
any part of the Canon-Law of England,
notwithstanding the Pope's Decretals;
i. e. whether these Canons ever received
confirmation by the Royal Authority,
either in synodal Constitutions, or elsewhere. 
And it would be a very hard

case, if our Kings had not the same Privileges
which are allowed in Popish Countries;
viz. that nothing passes for Canon-Law
within their Territories, till it pass the
examination of the King's Council, and
approbation by his Authority. Thence
in France nothing passes without the
King's Pareatis; nor in spain or Flanders,
without the King of spain's Placet;
no nor in the Kingdom of Naples, without
the Royal Exequatur. It is well
known, that the 6. Book of Decretals was
not allowed in France, because of the
quarrel between the King and Boniface
VIII. and that even the Council of
Trent it self was not allowed by Philip II. 
till it had been strictly examined by the
King's Council, that nothing might be
allowed which tended to the diminution
of his Prerogative. How then will men
justifie the making that a part of the Canon-Law
of England, which was repugnant
to the Rights of the Crown, and
deprives the King of the Power of taking
advice of those of his subjects, whom he
hath summoned for that end?3. The sanction of this Law is ceased,
which was Irregularity: And some of our
most Learned Iudges have declared, that
is taken away by the Reformation. But

in case any be of another opinion, I shall
urge them with this inconveniency; viz. 
that the great Instrument of discovering
the Plot falls under Irregularity by it. 
For it is most certain, by the Canon-Law,
that a man in Orders accusing others of
Treason, without making his due Protestation
in Court, is Irregular. But if
this be now thought unreasonable, as it
is, in the person of an Accuser, why should
it not be so in the case of Iudges? And
if the Irregularity be taken away, then
the sanction is gone: and if the sanction
be taken off in a meer positive Law, the
force of the Law is gone too. And therefore
this Canon-Law, which forbids Clergymen
being present in Capital Cases, and giving
Votes therein, is wholly taken away
by the Reformation. And we do not find
any mention of it for 80 years and more
after the Reformation; till about the time
of the Earl of strafford's Trial, a Book
being printed about the Privilege of Peers,
wherein this Protestation was mentioned,
hold was presently taken of it, by Men
who thought they could not compass
their ends without removing the Bishops
out of the House: and when the Bishops
insisted on their Right, and could not be
heard, but at last were willing to salve
        
their Right by Proxies; the Lords of the
Cabal prevailed with their friends, to declare
they would use no Proxies themselves,
and so by that artifice shut the
Bishops out of Doors. 4. The practice hath been so contrary,
since the Reformation, that I find no
manner of regard hath been shewed to it. 
For the Archbishop of Canterbury was the
first nominated in the Commission for the
Trial of the Queen of scots; as appears
by the Commission it self in Camden;
        Camden. Annal. A. D. 1586. 
which is directly contrary to the Canon-Law. 
some distinguish the Bishops acting
by Commission, from their being
Iudges in parliament. For which there is
no manner of Reason with respect to the
Canon-Law, which is rather more express
against any kind of Commissions in Cases
of Bloud; as appears by the Council of
Toledo, the synodal Constitution, and the
Pope's Decretals. And there hath never
been any scruple about Divines sitting on
the Crown-side as Iustices of the Peace,
        Vid. Lyndwood in Constit. Othob. c. Nè Clerici. v. In eisdem. 
when sentence of death is pronounced; nor
in the Ordinary's declaring Legit, or Non
legit, when a man's life depends upon it. 
But, which is yet more to our present purpose,
in the parliament 22. May 1626. upon
the Impeachment of the Earl of Bristol
        
of high Treason, 10 Bishops, 10 Earls,
10 Barons, were appointed to examine
the Evidence; and upon their Report he
was sent to the Tower by the whole House. 
All which shews, that there hath been
no regard had to the force of the Canon-Law
in this matter since the Reformation:
That being a spirit laied long since by
the Principles of our Church; and it
would be strange, if some mens zeal against
Popery should raise it again. "
"5","CHAP. III. The Precedents on both sides laid down:
those against the Bishops examined and
answered. II. I Now come to examine the Precedents,
and shall proceed therein according
to due Order of Time. And so the first is taken from the
saxon times;Lett. p. 57. 
        viz. from Brompton's Relation
about Edward the Confessour's appealing
to the Earls and Barons about
Earl Godwin's murthering of his Brother
Alfred. 
        pag. 59. 
        Here we see, saith the Authour of
the Letter, it was onely ad Comites & Barones
that he appealed, and they were onely

to judge of it, and not Bishops or Prelates. 
      I have 2 things to answer to this Precedent. 
1. That we have great reason to
suspect the truth of it. 2. That if it were
true, we have no reason to suspect the
Bishops to be excluded. 1. For the truth of the story. That
there is great reason to suspect it, appears,
in that it is the single relation of Brompton,
against the consent of the other Historians,
(and some of them much ancienter,
and nearer to that time,) who mention
K. Edward's charging Earl Godwin
with the Death of his Brother, not in
parliament, but as they were at Table together
at Winchester, upon the occasion
of a saying of Earl Godwin's, upon the
King's Cup-bearer's stumbling with one
foot, and recovering with another; see,
saith he, how one Brother helps another. 
Upon which Matt. Westminster, Knighton,
and others say, that the King charged him
about the Death of his Brother Alfred. 
Whatever the occasion was, our best Historians
of that time, Malmsbury and Ingulphus,
say, it was at an Entertainment
at Winchester, and that Earl Godwin died
upon the place; being choaked, as they
say, with a Morsel of Bread he took with

a great Execration upon himself if he were
not innocent. Knighton saith, he was
questioned for the Death of his Brother
by Hardecnute, and that he cleared himself,
by saying he did nothing but by the
King's command. But suppose Edward
to be never so weak a Prince, is it
likely this should be done by an Appeal
in parliament by the King himself;
and that afterwards, by the Judgment of
his Earls and Barons, he and his sons and
12 Kinsmen should make the King amends,
by as much Gold and silver as they could
carry between their Arms? Besides,
Brompton saith, this was done by Godwin
when he returned to England, after King
Edward's coming to the Throne; whereas
Malmsbury shews, that it was through
Earl Godwin's interest, that ever he came
to it; and so the marrying his Daughter
would make any one believe. 2. But suppose it true. What reason
is there to conclude the Bishops not present,
who were never absent through all
the saxon times, after Ethelbert's Conversion,
in any publick Councils of the Nation?
They had no Canon then to be
afraid of; for that of the Council of Toledo
was brought in by Lanfranc. And
it was not against the practice of those

Times. For if we believe as true a story
as this of Brompton, the Archbishop of
Canterbury himself condemned King Edward's
Mother Emma to a Trial by hot
Irons, which was present death without
a Miracle: and this it is said was done by
the consent of the King and the Bishops;
which is as good a Precedent against Temporal
Lords, as the other is against the
Bishops. However, this is certain, that
the Bishops then sate in the County-Court
at all Iudgments. And whereas the Authour
of the Letter would avoid this, by
saying that no Capital Crimes were tried
there;Lett. p. 110. the contrary is most certainly
true. For the Laws of King Edward, as
they were set forth by H. I. c. 31. mention
the Capitalia Placita that were there
held. And the Authour of the Ms. Life
of s. Cuthbert saith, that when one of
Earl Godwin's sons was Earl of Northumberland,
and one Hamel, a very bad man,
was imprisoned by him, his Friends interceded
earnestly with him, nè capite plecteretur,
that he should not lose his head. 
By which it appears, that Cases Capital
were heard and determined in those Courts,
the Bishop and Earl sitting together in
Iudgment. And here the Point is plainly
gained, because the Authour of the Letter
        
grants that the Bishops sate in all Iudgments
in the County-Courts, and then puts the
matter upon this Issue, whether Capital
Crimes were there tried or not; which I
have clearly proved that they were. But
I shall make another advantage of this
against the Authour of the Peerage, &c. for
it plainly overthrows that confident Assertion
of his,Lett. p. 21. That without doubt there
was a Negative Custom, that the Prelates
should not exercise Iurisdiction in Capital
Cases, so ancient as to be part of the Fundamental
Contract of the Nation. It were
a thousand pities that such well-sounding
words, so handsomely put together, should
signifie nothing. I dare not be so positive
as he is, but am of opinion, that if
he could be perswaded to produce this
Fundamental Contract of the Nation, which
I perceive he hath lying by him, it would
not amount to so much as a blind Manuscript. 
If it be said, that Brompton onely
mentions Earls and Barons, and Bishops
were not then made Barons; I answer,
that Baronies were brought into England
by the Conquerour, and therefore Brompton
must speak improperly, and consequently,
taking it onely for a Title of
Honour, he means no more then those
who were the Great men of that time,

and so may take in the Bishops too: of
which more afterwards. But there is one
thing more in the Laws of H. I. (which
were onely a restoring K. Edward's Laws)
that implies that Bishops had then a Power
of Judging in Cases Capital; which is
c. 58. Qui occiderit Episcopum sit in arbitrio
Principis & Episcoporum, He that killed
a Bishop was to be left to the Will of the
King and the Bishops. Which shews that
they were to hear and examine the whole
Evidence, and to give Judgment according
to it. After the saxon times,Lett. p. 55. the first Precedent
produced is of the 33 Edw. I. concerning
Nicolas segrave, who was summoned
to appear in parliament, and after
his Offences were opened, the King advises
onely with the Temporal Lords, who
declared, such a man deserved to lose his
Life. But is he sure the Bishops were
not present? No: he saith, that doth not
appear by the Record; but it appears clearly
they were not to meddle with it. How
so? The King declares, that he would have
the Advice Comitum, Baronum, Magnatum,
& aliorum de Consilio suo. But is he sure they
are not comprehended under Magnates,
and that there were no Clergy-men at that
time of the King's Counsel? What thinks

he is William de Hamilton, Dean of York▪
        
who was made Lord Chancellour Ian. 16. 
33 Edw. I. and this parliament was held
the next sunday after s. Matthias, which
was the latter end of February? And in
the 35. year, Ralph de Baldock, Bishop
of London, was made Lord Chancellour:
and scarce any other but Church-men had
that Office all his days. The Bishop of
Bath and Wells was Chancellour near twenty
years of his Reign; after him the Bishop
of Ely; after him the Dean of Chichester;
and then comes the Dean of York. 
And among the Lords Treasurers of his
time; were the Archdeacon of Dorset,
the Abbot of Westminster, two Bishops of
Bath and Wells, whereof one was Treasurer
at this time. These two, I hope,
we may suppose to be of the King's
Counsel in this business; who we are
certain were both Church-men. And if
they adjudged Nic. de segrave worthy of
death, who so likely to deliver that Judgment
as the Chancellour? But suppose
these were not there, whom doth he
mean by the Magnates then distinct from
Earls and Barons, who were of the House
of Peers? Mr. selden will inform him,
if he needs it, that there were no Dukes
till the II. of Edw. III. nor the Title of

        Marquess till R. II. nor of Vicount till
H. VI. And yet here were Magnates in
parliament, who were neither Earls nor
Barons: and therefore we must in all
reason understand the great Church-men,
who were not so nice of meddling with
Criminal Causes in parliament of the highest
nature in the time of Edw. I. As appears
by the great Cause so much agitated
in parliament 20 Edw. I. concerning the
Earls of Hereford and Gloucester; where
this latter is charged with raising Arms
without Commission, and committing
Murthers and horrible Devastations in
the Lands belonging to the other; and
the King in parliament appoints the Bishop
of Ely with others to be a Committee for
examination of this matter. And when
they had both submitted to the King's
Pleasure, we have these remarkable words
in the Placita parliamentaria. Per Consilium
Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum,
Comitum, Baronum, ceterorumque
de Consilio suo existentium, facere volens
in premissis, & ut voluntas sua justa
sit & rationabilis, prout decet, eorumque
assensum in premissis petiit, & Consilium. 
Propter quod, habito tractatu
diligenti coram ipso Domino Rege & Consilio
suo super predictis, tam ipsi Domino

Regi quam ceteris Prelatis & Magnatibus,
& singulis de Consilio suo, videtur
quoad Comit. Gloucestr. 
        and then follows
the sentence; which I confess did
not extend to Life, but to a Forfeiture
of his Estate to the King. However, we
see hereby that the Bishops were present
at all the praeliminary Debates, and the
King asked their Advice; so that they
had their Votes in the sentence, whether
it should extend to Life or not. In the Reign of Edw. II. we meet with
a remarkable Precedent in behalf of the
Bishops Right, which is of a Iudgment reversed
made by the Lords without the
Prelats, viz. the Iudgment against the
two spencers 15 E. II. which Iudgment is
said to be passed at Oxford that year, but
in the parliament at York,
        Claus. 15 Ed. 2. n. 23, 24. & dors. 13. 32. the same year,
it was nulled and made void before the
King, Lords and Commons; and one of
the Reasons given for it is, because the
Lords spiritual, who were Peers, assented
not to it. This Precedent had
been cited and allowed by Mr. Pryn, in
his Plea for the Lords;
        Plea for the Lords, p. 193. and therefore it is
to be wondered the Authour of the Letter
takes no notice of it. But the later Authour
of the Discourse about the Bishops
Peerage and Iurisdiction,
        Discourse of the Bishops Peerage, pag. 20. owns the truth

of the thing, saying, that the two Iudgments
aganst the two spencers were reversed
15 Edw. II. for this Cause, through
the great favour and interest they then had
at Court. But then he thinks he hath taken
off the force of this Precedent, by
saying that 1 Edw. III. c. 1. this Iudgment
is declared good, and therefore the
said Reversal null and void; and the two
spencers upon this affirmance of the Iudgment
were executed. This last Assertion
every one knows to be a grievous mistake,
that hath but looked into our History:
for the spencers were executed before
Edw. III. came to the Crown; the elder
in October 19 Edw. II. the other the latter
end of November 20 Edw. II. And
whereas he insists upon the Affirmance of
the Iudgment 1 Edw. III. he had done well
to have looked a little farther, and then
he would have found that Act also repealed
21 R. II. so that if the Act of
1 Ed. III. which affirms the first Judgment,
may seem to take off the force of
this Precedent, the repealing of that Act
in the 21 R. II. restores it again, and
leaves it in its full force. Especially if it
be considered, that the Act of 1 Ed. III. 
was not barely repealed, but declared in
parliament to be unlawfull, because Ed. II. 

was living,
        Rot. 64. 21 R. 2. 
        and true King, and imprisoned
by his subjects at the time of that very parliament
of 1 Ed. III. 
      Thus far this Precedent is good. But
I will conceal nothing that may with any
colour be objected against it. And I
cannot deny but what the Authour of the
Letter objects, against the Bishops constituting
a Proctor to represent them in Capital
Causes, seems to be of equal force
against this Precedent, viz. That this parliament
of the 21 R. II. and all that was
done in it, was repealed in the 1 H. IV. 
And if that be so, (and those Acts of
state which then passed had not again
been repealed 1 Ed. IV. ) then the Repealing
of that of 1. Ed. III. signifies nothing,
and consequently the Affirmance of the
first Iudgment against the two spencers is
good notwithstanding that Repeal. And
therefore that we may examine this matter
to the bottom, I shall set down the
very words of the Authour of the Letter
concerning it. speaking of the Declaration
made by the Lawyers in the 10 Ed. IV. 
concerning the Bishops making a Procurator
in Capital Causes, he hath these
words:pag. 79. 
        It is true, here is mention made
of their making a Proctor, which was Error
temporis, the Errour of those times, grounded

upon what was so lately done, (as they
looked upon it) though irregularly done, in
the last parliament of R. II. whom they
considered as their lawfull King; and in
truth he was so, the three Henry's that
came between being but Vsurpers. And
again, speaking of the same business of a
Proctor in the 21 R. II. he hath this remarkable
passage:pag. 115. 
        I have already shewed,
that this whole parliament was repealed for
the extravagant things that were done in it,
of which this was one. And therefore nothing
that was then done can signifie any
thing to a leading case any ways to be followed;
and this as little as any: except
it could be made appear, which I am
confident it cannot, that some Iudgment
had been reversed upon that account, because
the Prelats were not present, and
had not given their assent to it. 
      Now if I can make out these two
things, 1. That the parliament of R. II. 
was not legally repealed; 2. That the
Iudgment against the two spencers was
reversed, and that the Repeal of that Reversal
in 1 Ed. III. was revoked in 21 R. II. 
upon this very account, because the
Prelats were not present, and had not
given their assent to it; I hope the Authour
of the Letter will be satisfied, that

both this Precedent, and the Case of a
Proctor, are very significant in this Cause;
and that there is a great difference between
being confident, and certain of any
thing. 1. That the parliament of 21 R. II. 
was not legally repealed. And for this I
take the Authour's own acknowledgment,
that R. II. was in truth lawfull King, and
that H. IV. was but an Vsurper: Nay, I
add farther, that R. II. was alive and in
prison when H. IV. repealed the parliament
of 21 R. II. For so it is said in the
very Act of Repeal, that R. II. late King
of England was pursued, taken, put in
ward, and yet remaineth in ward. 
        And
now I leave it to the Authour of the Letter,
whether a parliament called by a
lawfull King, and the Acts of it, ought
to be deemed legally repealed by a parliament
that was called by an Usurper, and
held whilst the lawfull King was alive,
and detained in prison. 2. That the Iudgment against the two
spencers was reversed, and the Repeal of
the Reversal of it in 1 Ed. III. revoked
in 21 R. II. and that upon this very account,
because the Prelats were not present,
and had not given their assent to
it; which the Authour of the Letter is

        confident cannot be made appear. 
        pag. 115. That
this Iudgment was reversed for this Reason
I have already shewn, viz. in the
parliament at York 15 Ed. II. And I shall
now shew, that the Repeal of that Reversal
in 1 Edw. III. was revoked in
21 R. II. and that upon the account mentioned. 
For in this parliament Tho. le
Despenser, Earl of Gloucester, exhibited
two Bills, in which he prayeth that the
Revocation of the Exile of the two spencers
in 15 Ed. II. might be brought before
the King and confirmed, and that the
Repeal of the same made in the 1 Ed. III. 
might be revoked. Of which Act of
Repeal these Errours are assigned, among
others:Kot. 55, 56. 21 R. 2. 
        because the Prelats, who are
Peers of the Realm, did not assent to the
Iudgment; and because it was made onely
by the Earls and Barons, Peers of the
Realm, &c. and because it was made against
the form of the Great Charter of England,
in which it is contained, that no man
shall be exiled, or otherwise destroyed, but
by the lawfull Iudgment of his Peers, or by
the Law of the Land. so that it seems it
was looked upon as a breach of the Great
Charter, for the Temporal Lords to condemn
a Peer without the Assent of the
Bishops, and that such a Iudgment was

not esteemed a lawfull Iudgment by his
Peers. And those Errours of the first
Iudgment assigned in the Revocation of it
in 15 Ed. II. are allowed in this parliament
of 21 R. II. and that Revocation
confirmed, and the Repeal of it in 1 Ed. III. 
revoked upon the same account. I shall
onely observe,R. 2. 21. that in this parliament (as
before in 15 Ed. II. ) the Bishops are declared
to be Peers; Peers of the Realm,
Rot. 55. Peers in parliament, Rot. 56. 
& 61; but most fully and distinctly in
the Roll last cited, Peers of the Realm
in parliament. Of which farther use
may be made in the last Chapter concerning
the Peerage of the Bishops. 
      And now to sum up the force of this
Precedent for the Iurisdiction of the Bishops
in Cases of Treason. Here is a Reversal
of a Iudgment, because made without
the Assent of the Prelats, by the parliament
at York in 15 Ed. II. And whereas
it is said this Reversal was repealed, and
the first Iudgment affirmed in 1 Ed. III. I
have shewed, that this was no legal Repeal,
because Ed. II. was alive, and lawfull
King, (or else Ed. III. could never have
been so) in the time of that first parliament
of Ed. III. and consequently Ed. III. 
at that time was an Usurper, and the

Proceedings of that parliament null and
void. so that the Reversal in 15 Ed. II. 
stands good, notwithstanding the Repeal
in 1 Ed. III. Besides that this Repeal
(whatever it was) is solemnly revoked in
21 R. II. And H. IV. who reversed all
the Proceedings of the parliament of
21 R. II. during the life of R. II. is acknowledged
by the Authour of the Letter
to have been an Vsurper, and R. II. to
have been a lawfull King. And now I
think that this Precedent hath all the advantage
that can be, and that the Iurisdiction
of the Bishops in Cases of Treason
could not have been asserted in a higher
manner, then to have a Iudgment in Case
of Treason solemnly reversed in two parliaments
for this very cause, because the
Bishops, who are Peers, assented not to it:
And this Precedent owned by the House of
Commons, in their Petition to have a Common
Proctor appointed by the Clergy, in
this very parliament of 21 R. II. as is acknowledged
by the Authour of the Letter. 
        pag. 115. 
      To conclude this matter; whether the
Acts of parliament which contain this declaration
of the Peerage of Bishops, and
their Iurisdiction in Cases of Treason, were
sufficiently repealed or not; this solemn

Assertion of it in two several parliaments,
together with the Petition of the Commons
mentioned before, are a most clear evidence,
that in the general Opinion of
the King, Lords, and Commons, this
Iurisdiction did of right belong to the
Bishops. And I am sure they are a Demonstration
against the Authour of the
Peerage his Assertion, of a Negative Custome,
ancient as the Constitution of the
Nation, that Prelats should not exercise
Iurisdiction in Capital Cases. For had
this been a clear and undoubted Custom
from the first original of this Nation, it is
morally impossible it could have entred
into the minds of two parliaments, solemnly
to have raised this doubt, whether a
Judgment given in a case of Treason by
the Temporal Lords without the Assent
of the Bishops were valid, and to have
determined that it was not; when yet
there was no manner of reason to imagine
that the Bishops ever had any Jurisdiction
in such Cases, nay, when there
was an immemorial Custome and Usage
to the contrary, namely, that the Temporal
Lords had in all times exercised
this Jurisdiction alone, and the Bishops
had been excluded from any share in
it. 
And in the Apology of Adam D'Orleton,
Bishop of Hereford, and after of Winchester,
for his imprisoning R. de Baldock,
a great Confident of Hugh Despencer's, he
declares, that the reason why he was carried
to Newgate was through the violence
of the People; although, saith he, the
parliament then sitting, there was no
cause of fear but Justice would be done. 
His words are, Domino Rege, Praelatis,
Comitibus, ac aliis terrae Optimatibus Lundoniae
tunc congregatis & praesentibus, pro
Iustitia ibidem in parliamento convocatis
omnibus exhibenda. Which shews that
the Prelats then did sit in matters of Justice
in the House of Lords, and in Cases
Capital; for this R. de Baldock was arraigned
at Hereford for the same Crimes
that Hugh Despencer was. But the main strength of the Cause is
supposed to lie in the Precedents produced
out of the Rolls of parliament from the
4 Edw. III. to the 38 H. VI. The force of
these Precedents will be better understood,
if we consider these things. I. That many of them are meer Negative
Testimonies. so 4 Edw. III. at the
Trial of Roger Mortimer,Lett. p. 6. 
        it is said, the
Earls, Barons and Peers of the Realm
were present, therefore the Bishops were not▪
        
5 Edw. III. onely the Great ones returned,pag. 8, 9. 
therefore the Bishops did not. so in the
Case of sir Iohn Grey. From whence he
inferrs, that the Bishops were not to Iudge
so much as of a Battery. pag. 10. 25 Edw. III. in
sir William Thorp's Case, the Grantz de
parliament were asked their advice, therefore
not the Bishops. pag. 13. 1 R. II. in the Case
of Weston and Gomenitz, the Bishops not
mentioned; but other Lords, Barons and
Bannerets. pag. 16. 
        sir Ralph de Ferrer's Case
4 R. II. the Bishops not present, because not
comprised under les seigneurs de parliament. 
The like in sir Iohn Oldcastle's Case
5 H. V. pag. 37. 
        The Question, he saith, is, whether
Bishops be comprehended under les
seigneurs de cest present parliament. In
the Earl of Devonshire's Case 31 H. VI. the
strength lies in this,
        pag. 51. that the Peers are
onely mentioned; and he supposes no man
will say, the Bishops were his Peers or
Lords of the Realm. so that here are
Eight Precedents, that are no more then
Negative Testimonies: concerning which
in general,
        Jurisdiction of the House of Peers asserted, p. 91. 
        the Authour of the Iurisdiction
of the House of Peers asserted hath a good
observation; viz. That one, or two, or
twenty Precedents in the Negative, nay,
I say more, were the number equal as many
in the Negative as in the Affirmative, yet

it could not disprove their Iurisdiction: it
would onely shew, their Lordships were free
Agents, to doe it, or not to doe it, as they
saw Cause; but their Iurisdiction remained
entire still, to doe it whensoever they
would. so I say here; supposing that the
spiritual Lords were not present in these
Cases, it onely shews, that they were
free Agents, and might withdraw at some
times, and be present at others: which
cannot overthrow their Right, for these
Reasons. 
      (1. ) several of his Negative Precedents,
if they prove any thing, prove the Bishops
were not there, when he confesses they
might have been there. As,1. In Cases of Misdemeanours. At the
Trial of sir Iohn de Lee,
        Lett. pag. 11. 42 Ed. III. being
charged with several Misdemeanours, the
Record saith, the Prelats were present. 
50 Edw. III. 
        p. 12. several persons were accused
by the Commons for Misdemeanours,
and the Bishops he confesseth were present;
as Rich, Lions, Iohn Lord Latimer,
William Ellis, Iohn Peecher, Lord
Iohn Nevil: at all these Trials the Bishops,
saith he, were present; and no body
says but they might. so in the Case of Alice
Perrers,
        pag. 14. 50 Edw. III. the Record
saith, the Prelats were present, and gave

Iudgment as to Banishment, and Forfeiture
of her Estate. pag. 18. 10 R. II. Mich. de la
Pool, Lord Chancellour, was accused by
the Commons for several Misdemeanours
before the King, Prelats, and the Lords. 
Here he yields the Prelats were Iudges of
Misdemeanours together with other
Lords. And yet if several of his Negative
Precedents do prove any thing, they
prove too much, viz. that the Bishops
ought not to be present at the Trial of Misdemeanours:
For, he saith, the Bishops
were not present at the Trial of Weston and
Gomenitz, 1 R. II. nor at the Trial of the
Bishop of Norwich 7 R. II. nor at such
Iudgments as that of sir William de Thorp
25 Edw. III. 
        Lett. p. 10. 
        who was condemned for Bribery:
and yet he yields they were at the
Trial of Mich. de la Pool 10 R. II. But
if they ought not to be present at those
of 25 Ed. III. and 1 R. II. and 7 R. II. 
neither ought they to have been present
at the Trial of Mich. de la Pool. Either
therefore his argument doth not prove
they were not present at the former, being
onely from general words; or they
ought not to have been present at the
latter, which he confesses they were. 
This will best appear by comparing the
Cases together. 1 R. II. the Commons
        
deliver in a schedule to the Lords of their
Demands, before they would proceed to
a subsidy; among which one was, That
all such who without cause had lost or given
up any Castle, or Town, or Fortress, to the
dishonour of the King, or dammage of the
People, may be put to their Answer before
the Lords and Commons that parliament. 
Here was no particular Impeachment of
these Persons; but upon this the Lords
sent for these two Persons who were Prisoners
in the Tower upon this account;
and the Charge against them was, delivering
two Towns in Flanders without
Commission. Weston made a long and
plausible Defence, to which no Answer
was given; yet both were condemned to
die. pag. 17. The Bishop of Norwich was charged
with several Miscarriages and Misdemeanours,
saith he: why might not the Bishops
be present at this Trial? To that
he saith, he was charged with one Capital
Crime, viz. betraying Graveling to the
French: but he confesseth, he cleared
himself of this, before they came to Iudgment:
and yet he would have the Bishops
excluded at this Iudgment; and that of
sir William Elmham, sir Thomas Trivet,
and others; but confesses they were present
at the Trial and Iudgment of Mich. 

de la Pool. Let us then see, what kind
of Trial this was. He was impeached in
the name of the Commons of England, and
6 Articles were exhibited against him. 
The main were, concerning defrauding the
King, and misimploying the Aids granted
to the King last parliament, whereby much
mischief happened to the Kingdom: as may
appear by the Rolls, and the Articles
printed in Knighton. 
        Knighton de Event. p. 2684. Upon these Articles,
the Record saith that the Commons
prayed that Iudgment of Death might pass
upon him, as it did upon sir William de
Thorp for receiving 20 li. by way of Bribery. 
And yet this Iudgment of sir William
de Thorp is one of the Precedents
against the Bishops being present; when
he allows that they were present at the
whole Trial of this Mich. de la Pool,
when a great Minister of state was so hotly
charged by the Commons, for offences
of so great a nature, and which in their
Judgment deserved no less then Death. 
From whence it follows, by his own confession,
that the Bishops may be present,
when the Ministers of state are impeached
by the Commons of such Crimes
which in their Iudgment deserve no less
then Death. 
      
2. In Acts of Attainder, when the
Houses proceed in a Legislative way, he
grants the Bishops may be present; and
yet if some of his Precedents signifie any
thing, they prove they ought not to be
present at the passing of them. As,1. In the Case of Roger Mortimer and
others accused and tried in parliament
4 Ed. III. He confesseth the Roll cannot
be read,Lett. pag. 6. and therefore referrs to 28 Ed. III. 
where Roger of Wigmore desires that the
Attainder may be examined: which was
reversed by Act of parliament, and therefore
we may justly suppose the Iudgment
given against him was ratified in parliament. 
        Cestrens. l. 7. c. 44. Knighton, p. 2558. 
And some of our Historians say,
he was condemned judicio parliamenti. 
And in the Petition of Roger Wigmore,
he prays that the said statute and Iudgment
may be reversed and annulled. If
therefore the Prelats could not be present
here, then they are not to be present in
the Legislative way: If they were present
in Acts of Attainder, then this general
Negative way of arguing proves nothing;
for then the Bishops were comprehended
under the name of Peers: which, without
any Reason, he saith, the Bishops cannot
pretend to be; when it is notorious
that they challenged it in parliament

11 R. II. and it was then allowed, as well
as their Protestation. 
      2. In the case of the Murther of Iohn
Imperial,pag. 15. 3 R. II. an Act of parliament
passed to make it Treason: and he proves
the Bishops had no Vote in it, nor were
present at the preparing it. And yet he
confesses,
        pag. 3. 118. that the Bishops have a right to
sit in all Acts of Attainder, because they
sit then in their Legislative capacity. 
Therefore these Negative Precedents prove
nothing. 
      (2. ) The insufficiency of these Negative
Precedents appears by this, that we can
make it appear by good Testimonies,
that the Bishops have been often comprehended
under the general Titles of
Grantz, Peers, and Lords of parliament,
without any express mention made of
them. And because the great force of many
of his Testimonies lies wholly in this,
that the Bishops are not comprehended
under the names of Grantz, seigneurs,
and Peers, I shall endeavour to make it
clear beyond exception, that if the Precedents
must be determined by the general
words, all the advantage lies on the Bishops
side. It is certain that in elder times the

        Baronagium Anglie did take in all the
Lords of parliament, both spiritual and
Temporal. But I betake my self to the
expressions used in the Records; and because
the matter of the debate is confined
within the times of Ed. II. and IV. I shall
take notice of the language of parliament
within that time; reserving that of their
Peerage to the proper place for it. I begin, as the Authour of the Letter
doth, with 4 Edw. III. and in that year
n. 6. the Record runs thus; Et est assentu
& accorde per nostre seigneur le Roi,
& tout le Grantz en plcyn Parlement:
where a Law was passed concerning Trial
by Peers; and in the passing of a Law
our Authour allows the Bishops to be present. 
But it is more plain n. 12. Accorde
per nostre seigneur le Roi, & les Grantz
de mesinme le Parlement; It is agreed by
the King, and the Great ones in parliament. 
But that the Bishops are comprehended
under theseGrantzis evident; for it is
there said, that the Petitions of Edmund
Earl of Kent and Margaret Countess of
Kent, to which that Agreement referrs,
were read before the King, the Prelats,
the Counts, the Barons, and other Grantz
of the parliament. In the same year, n. 14. 
we meet with les Preres des Prielatz &

autres Grantz,
          the Petition of the Bishops
and other Great men: and then it follows,
Nostre seigneur le Roi en pleyn
Parlement, per assent, accord, prieres &
conseal des ditz Prelatz & autres Grantz;
         
Our Lord the King in full parliament, by
the assent, accord, petition and advice of
the said Prelats and other Grantz. Which
shews that they are some of the Grantz
of parliament. 
        
      5 Ed. III. n. 3. Touz les Prelatz &
autres Grantz: n. 13. Grantz in general
is used in the Debate between the Abbot
of Crowland and sir Thomas Wake: and
n. 15. le Roi & as autres Grantz en pleyn
Parlement: n. 16. Item fu accorde per
le Roi & touz le Grantz en mesme le Parlement,
auxibien per Prelatz come per
autres;It was agreed by the King and
the Great men of the parliament, as well by
the Prelats as others. Nothing can be
plainer then that here the Bishops are
called Grantz, as well as the other Lords
of parliament. 6 Ed. III. n. 1. Devant nostre seigneur
le Roi, & touz le Prelatz, & autres
Grantz: The Articles were read before the
King, the Prelats, and other Great men. 
If the Bishops had not been comprehended
under Grantz, the Record would

have onely used Grantz, and not autres
Grantz. But the same expression is again
used n. 5. In the second part of the
Rolls of that year, n. 1. we find three several
ways of expressing the Persons then
present: the first, les Prelatz, Countes,
Baronns, & autres Grantz du Parlement;
the next is, queux Prelatz, &
autres Grantz; the third is, touz le
Grantz en mesme le Parlement: and
all these are used to express the same Persons. 
And again n. 3. touz les Grantz
du dit Parlement; which are there opposed
to Chivalers des Countez; and
are more distinctly mentioned before in
these words, les ditz Prelatz, Countes,
Barouns, & autres Grantz, & les Chivalers
des Countes, & tote la Conumune. 
sometimes the Grantz are taken in general,
for all of the House of Peers; and
the Commons for the Lower House. so
21 Ed. III. n. 63. il assentuz per lui, les
Grantz, & la dit Comunalte a son Parlement:
and again, ditz Grantz & de
tote la Com̄e susditz: and, le Roi per
assent des Grantz commanda a la ditz
Com̄e. From these examples, and many
more which might, if it were needfull,
be produced, it evidently appears that
the Bishops were Grantz in parliament,

according to the language of that Time:
and therefore the Precedents produced
wherein onely the Grantz are mentioned,
are of no force at all against the Presence
of the Bishops. And that Assertion of
the Authour of the Peerage,
        pag. 15▪
        
        &c. appears
to be without any ground, viz. that the
Bishops are never spoken of in any Record
but by the name of Bishops or Prelats, or
some such name, to distinguish them from
the Laiety. These general Negatives are
very bold and dangerous things; and one
Affirmative overthrows them. But I
have produced many Instances to the
contrary, and might do many more. such
men who dare venture upon such bold
sayings, must be presumed to have read
over all the Records themselves; and
must presume that none else ever so much
as looked into them. But that Authour discovers
too much his second-hand Learning
in these matters; and we might have
wanted several of his Precedents, had it
not been for Mr. selden's Baronage. 
      As to the Title of seigneurs du parliament,
        Rights of the Bishops, p. 56, 57, &c. 
        
being common to the Bishops, I
am prevented by another hand. I shall onely adde two Precedents
more, not taken notice of by others. The
one 7 R. II. The Answer of Mich. de la

Pole is said to becoram Magnatibus &
Communitate in parliamento;where
the Authour of the Letter confesseth the
Bishops were present, and therefore comprehended
under theMagnates. The
other 15 H. VI. One Philipps complained
against the Bishop of London to the House
of Commons: they sent the Complaint up to
the Lords: the Bishop asks the Advice of
the House; who gave this Answer, Non
consentancum fuit aliquem Procerum
alicui in eo loco responsurum. Which
had signified nothing, if the Bishops
had not been allowed to be Proceres Regni. 
so much for his Negative Precedents. II. some of his Precedents were condemned
in parliament to be irregular and
erroneous in other respects; and therefore
it is no wonder if they should be so
in this. 1. The Iudgment upon Roger Mortimer,
Earl of March, 4 Ed. III. was reversed
in parliament 28 Ed. III as defective
and erroneous in all points; being
without any Proof or Witnesses, or bringing
the Person to answer for himself. And
therefore it was an Honour for the Bishops
not to be present. 2. The Iudgment upon Haxey,Lett. p. 24. 
20 R. II. is confessed by the Authour to be
        
most unjust, and would not onely have
shaken, but wholly destroyed the very foundation
of parliament; and reversed 1 H. IV. 
as against Right and Course of parliaments. 
And he confesseth the Bishops were present
at condemning it, but not at passing it. 
Which also makes much for their Honour. 
      III. some of his Precedents prove
that when the Bishops did withdraw, they
did it voluntarily, and took care to preserve
their Right, either by Protestation,
or appointing a Proxy. 
      [1. ] That they withdrew voluntarily. 
so 5 Ed. III. it is said,
        Lett. p. 8. that the Bishops did
withdraw at that time, being of opinion
that it did not properly belong to them to
give Counsel about keeping the Peace, and
punishing of Malefactours: and so, saith
he, they went away by themselves, and
returned no more. But although this
proves nothing but a voluntary Act of the
Bishops in withdrawing; yet the representation
made of this matter is so partial,
and different from the Record, that I cannot
but take a little more notice of it. 
      1. He saith, that the Prelats being of
opinion that it belonged not properly to them
to give Counsel about keeping the Peace, or
punishing such evils, they went away by

themselves, and returned no more. Thereby
insinuating, that they looked on this
matter as wholly unfit for them to meddle
in, and thereupon left the House. 
Whereas the words of the Record are,
si alerent mesmes les Prelatz & les
Procurators de la Clergie per eux
mesmes a conseiler de choses susdites, &
les ditz Countes, Barons & autres
Grantz per eux mesmes: so the Prelats
and Proctors of the Clergy went by
themselves toconsult about the aforesaid
matters, and the Earls, Barons and
other Great men by themselves. so that
this withdrawing was but into several
Committees, as was usual at that time, by
which the sense of the 3 Estates was best
understood; and then they met together,
and agreed upon what was fit to be made
a Law. This appears by 6 Edw. III
A quen jour de Ioedi eu ont trete & deliberation,
cest assavoir les ditz Prelats
per eux mesmes, & les ditz Countes,
Barons, & autres Grantz, per eux
mesmes; & auxint les Chivalers des
Countes per eux mesmes: Upon which
Thursday they entered upon debate, (concerning
the News from scotland) the
Prelats by themselves, the Lords and other
Great men by themselves; and so the

Knights of Counties by themselves. The
Houses being then not wholly separate,
nor always together; but dividing into
Committees, and not into Houses, as occasion
required; and then joyning together
to express their common sense. so
40 Ed. III. when the occasion of their
meeting was delivered, which was an extraordinary
message from Rome, the
Pope sending for Tribute and Homage, it
is said, the Bishops went by themselves, and
the other Lords by themselves, and the
Commons by themselves; and then met
together, and declared their unanimous
resolution to oppose to the uttermost any
such Demand. such a withdrawing of
the Bishops it was in this case. For they
and the Proctors of the Clergy (whether
by them we understand the Procuratores
Cleri, who, according to the Modus tenendi
parliamentum, made a part of the
parliament; or the Proxies of the absent
Bishops, who were allowed to supply
their places, as appears by 35 Ed. I. and
the Case of the Bishops of Durham and
Carlile in the parliament at Westminster
Ed. II. and 17 R. II. and many other instances
afterwards) thought fit to consider
in this matter what was most proper
for them. And accordingly we find

        Ecclesiastical Censures added to the Civil
sanctions, and brought in by the Prelats
at that time, which are still extant in the
Record. 
      2. Whereas he saith, the Bishops returned
no more, the Record saith the contrary. 
For it expresly saith, that the Orders
for keeping of the Peace agreed on by
the Committee of Lords were read before the
King, the Bishops, the Knights of Counties,
and the Commons, and did please
them all; & per nostre seigneur le Roi,
Prelatz, Countes, Baronns, & autres
Grantz, & auxint per les Chivalers de
Countez & gentz de Commun, furent
pleynment assentuz & accordez. And the
same is immediately said of the Censures
brought in by the Bishops. Which made
me extremely wonder at his saying that
the Bishops returned no more; whereas it
is very plain, they did not onely return,
but the Orders were read before them,
and they did give their assent to the Passing
of them. 
      In the parliament 11 R. II. that it was
onely a voluntary withdrawing, I prove
from the concessions of the Authour of
the Letter; viz. that they might be present
in all Acts of Attainder. For it is evident
from the printed statutes, that they

proceeded by way of Attainder against
the Ministers of state; and therefore they
might have been present, if they pleased,
upon the Authour's own grounds. How
is it then possible for him to understand
de Iure non possumus, in their Protestation
11 R. II. of the Law of the Land, when
he grants that in all Acts of Attainder,
they may de jure be present and give
their Votes?[2. ] When they did solemnly withdraw,
they took care to preserve their Right
two ways; (1. ) by Protestation, (2. ) by
Proxie. 
      1. By Protestation, saving their Right;
which was received by the House, and entered:pag. 24. 
of which before. The late Authour
of the Peerage and Iurisdiction of
the Lords spiritual will not allow the
Protestation to be an argument of any
Right; neither, saith he, doth the permission
or allowance of any Protestation
yield the Right which the Protester is desirous
to save, but onely saves the Right
which he had before, if he had any. Whereas
the Authour of the Letter makes it as
good as a Law,
        Lett. p. 23. being entred in the Iournal-Book,
that such a thing was agreed
by the King and the two Houses. I will
not deny that the former Authour speaks

more reasonably in this matter, when he
saith, that the utmost a Protestation can
doe is, to anticipate a Conclusion, or Estoppell;
i. e. to provide that the doing of any
such Act as is contained in the Protestation,
shall not be construed to the prejudice of the
Party, so as to bar or conclude him from
claiming afterwards that which in truth is
his Right. It is true, this Protestation passed
with greater solemnity then usually;
for it was with the consent of the King
and both Houses: but however it retained
the nature of a Protestation. And there
was no distinction at that time between a
Iournal-Book and the Rolls of parliament. 
For a good Authour assures us,selden's Bar. pag. 6. 
        the Iournals
of the Vpper House began 1 H. VIII. 
and therefore the Authour of the Peerage,
        Rights of the Bishops, pag. 76. 
        &c. deserved no such severe reproof
on that account. But this is all I plead
for, viz. that this Protestation was a salvo
to their Right; which meeting with
no contest or opposition in the Houses,
but passing with unanimous consent, is a
certain argument the Houses did not think
there was any Law to exclude them. 
And therefore the Authour of the Iudicature
very well saith, That had it not been
for the Canon-Law, (for which he referrs
to the synodal Constitutions at Westminster
        
21 H. II. which is onely reviving
the Council of Toledo's Canon,) they might
have been present both by Common Law,
and by the Law of God. 
      2. By Proxie, or one common Procurator
to appear in parliament for them,
and to vote in the name of the whole
Body. This was received and allowed
21 R. II. upon the Petition of the House
of Commons, because Iudgments had been
reversed without their concurrence. Against
this the Authour of the Letter objects many
things which are easily answered. 1. That hence it appears they could not
be personally present. 
        Lett. p. 28. On the contrary,
from hence it follows they had a parliamentary
Right to be present; although
they said by Canon-Law they could not. 
      2. That it was never practised but in
this one parliament. That is strange, when
himself confesseth, that it passed for good
Law 10 Ed. IV. Term. Pasch. n. 35. and
the same is cited by stamford Placit. Cor. 
l. 3. f. 153. pag. 78. To which judgment of the
Lawyers, and the greatest of their time,
(for Littleton was then Judge 10 Ed. IV. )
we have a very extraordinary Answer
called Error Temporis;
        pag. 79. which will equally
make void the Law or Iudgment of any
Age. But is it possible, that should pass

for Law 10 Ed. IV. which was never practised
but once 21 R. II. and the contrary
practice had been onely allowed all the intermediate
times? Thus a short answer
may be given to the Constitution of Clarendon,
it was Error Temporis; to the allowing
the Protestation 11 R. II. it was Error Temporis;
and so on to the end of the Chapter. 
If there were any Error Temporis in this
matter, it lay in this, that they took this
Precedent 21 R. II. for a sufficient Ground,
that the Bishops should onely appear by Proxy
in such Cases; whereas the Canon-Law being
taken away since the Reformation as
to these matters, their Right of Personal
appearing doth return to them of course. 3. That this parliament was repealed
1 H. IV. Lett. p. 79. But this I have answered already
from his own words, wherein he acknowledges
him to be an Vsurper, and consequently
the Repeal not made by a legal
parliament. And this Repeal was again
taken off 1 Ed. IV. 4. That it is not at all parliamentary,
for one or two men to represent a whole Body. 
The consequence then is, that they
ought to enjoy their own Personal Right. 
All that we urge from hence is, that the
Bishops kept up their Right still by their
Proxies, when they thought the Canons
        
would not allow voting in their own
Persons. 
      IV. some of his Precedents do prove,
that after the Protestations and Proxies,
they did assert their own Personal Right,
and were present both at Examinations,
and at the whole Proceedings. 
      1. At Examinations. As in the Case
of sir William Rickill 1 H. IV. who was
brought to parliament before the King and
the two Houses,Lett. p. 31. the Lords spiritual and
Temporal and the Commons then assembled
together. And he grants the Bishops
were present at his Examination. 
      2. At the whole Proceedings,
        pag. 41. to pag. 48. 28 H. VI. 
where he confesseth the Bishops were not
onely personally present, but did act and bear
a principal part in aIudicialproceeding in
parliament, in a Case that was in it self Capital,
viz. of William de la Pole, Duke of
suffolk. Which is very fully related by
the Authour, and needs no repetition. 
All that he hath to say to this, is, that
the whole Proceedings were irregular, and
not to be drawn into Precedent. Whereas
a great Lawyer in his time, sir E. C. made
use of this as a sufficient Precedent in a
Case of great moment, about Commitment
upon a general Accusation. But there is
not any Irregularity expressed or intimated

in the Bishops appearing, and judging
as other Lords did; and the Judgment
was not reversed because of their being
there, as we have shewed others have
been for their being absent. V. None of all his Precedents do prove
that the Bishops were ever excluded from
sitting, by any Vote of the House of Lords
or Commons. That they might voluntarily
withdraw, we deny not; or not be
present at giving of Iudgment out of regard
to the Canons: which is all that is proved
by the Precedent of Iohn Hall 1 H. IV. of
the Earls of Kent,
        pag. 32. 
        Huntington,
        pag. 34. &c. 
2 H. IV. of sir Iohn Oldcastle 5 H. V. and
of sir Iohn Mortimer 2 H. VI. 
        pag. 37. And this
we have made appear was done by them
out of regard to the Canon-Law;
        pag. 39. the
force of which being taken away by the
Reformation, the Bishops are thereby restored
to their just parliamentary Right. 
Neither can any Disusage be a bar to that
Right, since the ground of that Disusage
was something then supposed to be in
force, which is now removed by the Reformation. 
And I fear, if this kind of
arguing be sufficient to overthrow the
Bishops Right, much stronger of the
same kind may be used to overthrow the
King's supremacy in mattters of Religion. 

so great care ought men to have, lest under
the colour of a mighty zeal against
Popery, they do overthrow the very Principles
of our Reformation. 
      VI. There are Precedents upon Record
in the Rolls of parliament, which are not
mentioned by the Authour of the Letter,
which do prove that the Bishops were present
at the Examination of Treason and Capital
Offences in parliament. And that within
the time,pag. 5. 51. wherein he pretends to give
an account of all the Trials recorded in the
Rolls. Which shews how easily men pass
by those things they have no mind to see. I begin with 4 Ed. III. and I must doe
him that right, as to say, that he doth
not onely mention the Trial of Roger
Mortimer,
        pag. 6. but of sir simon Bereford and
others who were accused and tried in parliament. 
But pretending, that the Roll of
that parliament is so defaced that it cannot
be read, he runs to that of 28 Ed. III. and
so gently passes over all the other Trials
which are in the Record, and are more
plain and express as to this matter. Among
the Articles against Roger Mortimer, Ed. l
of March, one is, that after he knew certainly
the death of Edw. II. he made use of
Instruments to perswade Edward Earl of
Kent, that King's Brother, that he was

still living, and so drew him into a design
for his Rescue; for which he was attainted
at Winchester, and there suffered death for
it. Among these Instruments the chief
was one Mautravers, who for that Reason
was attainted this parliament: and
the words of the Record are,Rot. Parl. 4 Ed. 3. n. 3. 
        Trestouz
les Pieres, Counts & Barons assemblez
a cest Parlement a West. si ont examine
estraitement, & sur ce sont assentuz
& accordez, que John Mautravers si est
culpable de la mort Esmon Count de
Kent, &c. All the Peers, Counts and Barons
assembled in this present parliament,
upon strict examination do assent and agree,
that John Mautravers is guilty of
the death of Edmund Earl of Kent. Here
we have the strict Examination of a Capital
Case in parliament, and all the Peers
are said to be present at it. It is used as
an argument by the Authour of the Letter,
that in the case of Roger Mortimer,pag. 7. 
        the
Bishops could not be comprized under the
general name of Peers, since the Barons are
first in rank. But here the Peers are mentioned
before Counts and Barons; and it
will be impossible for him to assign any
other Peers at that time, that were named
before them, but the Prelats; who
frequently are so put in the Records of

that time: as in the same parliament n. 12. 
Prelatz, Countes, Barons;n. 13. Et
per assent des ditz Prelatz, Countes,
Barons; so again n. 14. 15. 17. 24. 25. 
But the Authour of the Letter saith,pag. 7. 
        they
cannot pretend to be Peers of the Realm. 
Let him name then other Peers of the
Realm at that time, who were neither
Counts nor Barons, and were before them. 
But if we are to judge who are Peers of
the Realm by the Records of parliament,
I do not question but I shall make it evident,
that the Bishops were so esteemed;
and that some persons, who pretend to
great skill in Records, either have not
searched so diligently, or have not observed
so carefully about this matter as they
might have done. But of this afterwards. In the same parliament Judgment was
passed upon Boges de Boyons, Iohn Deveril,
Thomas Gurnay, William Ocle; but being
by way of Attainder, and not upon particular
examination, which is mentioned in the
case of Mautravers, I pass them over. In the Pleas of the Crown held before
the King in this parliament, we find another
Case which relates to our present debate;
viz. of Thomas Lord Berkely and
Knight, who was arraigned for the death
of King Ed. II. who came before the King

        in pleno parliamento, in full parliament,
and there pleaded Not guilty; and declared
he was ready to clear himself as the
King's Court should advise. Then they
proceeded to particular examination of him,
how he could acquitt himself, being Lord of
the Castle where the King was murthered,
he being committed to his Custody and
John Matravers. He pleaded for himself,
that he was then sick at Bradley, and knew
nothing of it. They charged him, that the
Keepers of the Castle were of his own appointing;
and therefore he was bound to
answer for them. He answered, that they
with Matravers having received the King
into their custody, he was not to be blamed
for what they did: and for this he put himself
upon his Country. At the day appointed
for his Trial, he appears again coram
Domino Rege in pleno parliamento;
and the Iury returned him Not guilty. But
because he appointed Gurney and Ocle to
keep his Castle of Berkely, by whom the
King was murthered, the King appoints
him a day the next parliament to hear his
sentence; and in the mean time he was
committed to the custody of Ralph Nevil
steward of the King's House. In the
next parliament 5 Edw. III. n. 18. The
Prelats, Earls and Barons petition the

King, that he might be discharged of his
mainprisors: the which was granted, and
a farther day given him to appear next
parliament. But we reade no more of
him, till the summons he had 14 Ed. III. 
as one of the Lords in parliament. The
great force of this Precedent lies in understanding
what is meant by appearing
before the King in full parliament. If
under this the Bishops be comprehended,
then this will be an uncontroulable Precedent
of the presence of the Bishops in
the Examination of a Case Capital. What the importance of this phrase of
full parliament is, will best appear by the
use of it in the Records of that time. 
4 Ed. III. n. 6. Et est assentu & accorde
per nostre seigneur le Roi, & touz les
Grantz en pleyn Parlement. Where it
was agreed, that the procedings at that
time by the Lords against those who were
not Peers should not be drawn into consequence;
and that the Peers should be charged
onely to try Peers. Which hath all
the formality of an Act of parliament:
and therefore all the Estates were present,
n. 8. Accorde est per nostre seigneur le
Roi & son Conseil en pleyn Parlement. 
Which was an Act of Pardon concerning
those who followed the Earl of Lancaster. 
5 Ed. III. n. 10. we have the particular
mention of the Bishops, as some of those
who do make a full parliament. Accorde
est per nostre seigneur le Roi, Prelatz,
Countes, Barons, & autres Grantz du
Roialm en pleyn Parlement: and n. 17. 
En pleyn Parlement si prierent les
Prelatz, Countes, Barons, & autres
Grantz de mesme le Parlement, a nostre
seigneur le Roi, &c. 6 Ed. III. n. 5. the Archbishop of Canterbury
made his Oration en pleyn Parlement,
which is explained by en la presence
nostre seigneur le Roi, & de touz
les Prelatz, & autres Grantz. n. 9. si est
accorde & assentu per touz en pleyn Parlement:
who those were, we are told before
in the same number, viz. les Prelatz,
Countes, Baronns, & touz les autres
somons a mesme le Parlement. 
Which is the clearest explication of full
parliament, in the presence of all those who
were summoned to parliament. From
whence it follows, that where a full
parliament was mentioned at that time,
the Bishops were certainly present; and
consequently did assist at the Trial of
Thomas Lord Berkely, who appeared before
the King in full parliament: as
Nich. de segrave did 33 Ed. I. and there

the Bishops are expresly mentioned as present;
as appears by what hath been said
before concerning his Case. 5 H. IV. Henry Hotspur, son to the
Earl of Northumberland, was declared a
Traitour by the King and Lords in full
parliament; and the same day, the Father
was, upon examination, acquitted of
Treason by the Peers. It is not said that
this was done in full parliament, as the other
was: but there are several circumstances
which make it very probable the
Bishops were then present. (1. ) When
the Earl of Northumberland took his
Oath of Fidelity to the King, he did it,
saith the Record, upon the Cross of the
Archbishop; which was to be carried before
him, if he went out of the House. 
(2. ) The Archbishop of Canterbury praied
the King, that forasmuch as himself and
other Bishops were suspected to be in Piercie's
Conspiracy, that the Earl might upon
his Oath declare the truth: who thereupon
did clear them all. Which shews that
the Archbishop was then present in the
House. And for the same reason that he
was present, we may justly suppose the
other Bishops to have been so too. 
(3. ) The Earl of Northumberland beseeched
the Lords and Earls and Commoners,

that if he brake this Oath, they would intercede
no more with the King for him. 
Now the better to understand this, we
are to consider, that H. IV. takes notice
in his declaration upon the Rebellion of
sir Henry Piercy,
        Walsingh▪
          hist. Angl. pag. 366. that the Earl of Northumberland
and his son gave out, that
they could have no access to the King, but
by the Mediation of the Bishops and Earls,
and therefore did beseech them to intercede
with the King for them. It is not then
probable, that those should be now left
out, when the words are large enough to
comprehend them, and no one circumstance
is brought to exclude them. For
that general one, of their not being Peers,
will be fully refuted afterwards. But that which puts this out of dispute
is, (4. ) that the Record saith, n. 17. the
Commons not onely gave the King thanks
for the pardon of the Earl of Northumberland,
but the Lords spiritual and Temporal,
in these remarkable words; Et au•i
mesmes les Cōes remercierment les
seigneurs Espirituelx & Temporelx de
lour bon & droiturell judgment quils avoient
fait come Piers du Parlement:
And likewise the Commons gave thanks to
the Lords spiritual and Temporal for the
good and right Iudgment which they had given
        
in this case as Peers of parliament. 
Which is a clear Precedent of the Bishops
judging in a Capital Case, and that as Peers. 
      2 H. VI. n. 9. Iohn Lord Talbott had
accused Iames Boteler, Earl of Ormond,
of sundry Treasons before the King and
his great Council; and after, before Iohn
Duke of Bedford, Constable of England. 
The King takes advice of his parliament
about it; and then it is expresly said in
the Record, De avisamento & assensit
Dominorum spiritualium & Temporalium
ac Communitatis Regni Anglie, in
eodem parliamento existent', facta fuit
quedam abolitio delationis, nuntiationis,
& detectionis predict, &c. Here the King
adviseth with the Lords spiritual in an accusation
of Treason; and therefore they must
be present in the debates concerning it. I leave now any considerate person to
judge impartially on which side the Right
lies. For on the one side,1. There is the Constitution of Clarendon
interpreted by H. II. and the Bishops
at Northampton. 
      2. A Protestation of their Right entered,
and allowed by King, Lords and
Commons, 11 R. II. 
      3. A Reversing of Iudgments owned by
parliament for want of their presence, 21 R. II. 
      
4. A Preserving of their Right by
Proxie, when they thought their Personal
attendance contrary to the Canons. 
      5. A Bar to a total discontinuance of
their personal Right, by an allowed Precedent
28 H. VI. 
      6. A Restoring them to their former
Right, by removing of the force of the
Canon-Law upon the Reformation. 
      7. No one Law or Precedent produced
for excluding them, even in those
Times, when they thought the Canons
did forbid their presence. 8. several Precedents upon Record,
wherein they were present at Examinations
and Debates about Cases Capital. 
      On the other side,1. The Precedents are General, and
Negative. 
      2. Or relating to such Cases wherein
they are allowed to be present. 3. Or of Iudgments condemned as erroneous
by parliament. 4. Or of voluntary Withdrawing, with
Protestation of their Right, and making
of Proxies. 
      5. Or of not being present at the passing of
Iudgment out of regard to the Canon-Law. 
      And now on which side the Right lies,
let the Authour of the Letter himself judge. "
"6","CHAP. IV. The Peerage of the Bishops cleared; how
far they make a third Estate in parliament. 
Objections against it answered. THERE remain Two things to be
considered, which are put in by
way of Postscript by the Authour of the
Letter: the one concerns the Peerage
of the Bishops, the other their Being a
Third Estate in parliament. 1. Concerning their Peerage. To
prove this two statutes had been alledged,
25 Ed. III. c. 6. and 4 H. V. c. 6. and the
opinion of Iudges and Lawyers out of the
Year-Books. But although these had
been very significant, if they had been
against them; they have the hard fortune
to signify nothing, when they are for
them. A meer Protestation becomes good
Law, very substantial Law, if it be supposed
to make against the Bishops; and
yet in that very Protestation the Right of
Peerage is expresly challenged, (as well
as it is asserted and taken for granted in
the statutes mentioned. ) Is that part of

the Protestation invalid? and must nothing
pass for Law but what is against
them? Is it credible that a Right of Peerage
should be owned and received in
Acts of parliament, in Protestations, in
Year-Books, time after time; and no opposition
made against it by the Temporal
Lords all that time, in case they believed
the Bishops had challenged that which by
no means did belong to them? Did not
the Temporal Lords understand their own
Privileges? or were they willing to suffer
the Bishops to assume their Titles to
themselves without the least check or
contradiction, and let their Protestations
be entered in the Rolls of parliament without
any contrary Protestation? I do
not question but the Authour of the Letter
did reade the Bishops Protestation at
large in the parliament-Rolls 11 R. II. 
And can any thing be plainer, then that
therein they challenge a Right of Peerage
to themselves, ut Pares Regni—cum
caeteris Regni Paribus, &c. ? And this
Protestation, he saith, was entered by consent
of the King, Lords Temporal, and
Commons; as is expressed in the Rolls. 
Were the Temporal Lords awake? or
were they mean and low-spirited men?
No; they were never higher then at this

time, when the King himself durst not
withstand them. What could it be then,
but meer conviction of their just Right of
Peerage, which made them suffer such a
Protestation as that to pass, after so solemn
and unusual a manner, and to be
enrolled par Commandment du Roy,
& assent des seigneurs Temporels &
Communs; as it is in the Rolls? Was
all this onely a Complement to the Potent
Clergy at that time? But who can imagine
that King, Lords and Commons
should complement at that rate, as to
suffer the Bishops to challenge a Peerage
to themselves in parliament, if they had
not an undoubted Right to it? This
one argument is sufficient to convince any
reasonable man. Especially when we consider,
that in the same parliament, before
the Protestation was brought in, a motion
was made n. 7. by all the Lords spiritual
and Temporal, which they claimed
come leur libertez & franchise, as their
Liberty and Privilege, that all weighty matters
moved in this parliament, or to be moved
in any to come, touchant Pieres de
la Terre, concerning the Peers of the
Realm, should be determined, adjudged
and discussed by the course of parliament;
and not by the Civil, nor by the Common

Law of the Land, used in inferiour Courts
of the Realm. The which Claim, Liberty and
Franchise, the King most willingly allowed
and granted in full parliament. From
whence it is evident, that the King and
parliament did allow the Right of Peerage
in the Lords spiritual; for it is said expresly
in the Record, that all the spiritual
as well as Temporal Lords joyned in this
Claim: which being allowed them in full
parliament, is an evidence beyond contradiction
of their Right of Peerage. 
      But against this no less is pretended
then Magna Charta, viz. that every man
who is tried at the King's suit must be
tried by his Peers. Lett. pag. 85. Now if a Bishop be
tried for any Capital offence, he is tried by
the Commoners, and that is the Common Law
of England; it hath ever been so, never
otherwise: then must Commoners be his
Peers, and he and Commoners must be
Pares. 
      To this Argument, how strong soever
it appears, these two things may be justly
answered. 1. That the matter of Fact cannot be
made out, that a Bishop hath always been
tried by Commoners. 
      2. That if it could, it doth not overthrow
their Peerage in parliament. 
      
(1. ) That the matter of Fact cannot
be made out, viz. that if a Bishop be tried
for a Capital Offence, he is tried by the
Commoners; that it hath ever been so, never
otherwise. 
        Antiq. Brit. pag. 223. For in 15 Ed. III. Iohn stratford,
Archbishop of Canterbury, was at the
King's suit accused of Capital Crimes,
viz. of no less then Treason, and Conspiracy
with the French King. He put himself
upon his Trial in parliament. A parliament
was called; and he at first refused
admission into the House; which he
challenged tanquam major Par Regni
post Regem, & Uocem primam in parliamento
habere debens, as the First Peer
of the Realm after the King, and having
the first Uote in parliament. Upon
which, and the intercession of his Friends,
he is admitted into the House; and there
he put himself upon the Triall of his
Peers. At which time a great Debate
arose in the House, which continued a
whole Week; and it was resolved, that
the Peers should be tried onely by Peers
in parliament. Whereupon the Archbishop
had 12 Peers appointed to examine
the Articles against him: 4 Bishops,
viz. London, Hereford, Bath, and Exceter;
4 Earls, Arundel, salisbury, Huntingdon,
and suffolk; and 4 Barons,

        Percy, Wake, Basset, and Nevil. Here
we have all that can be desired in the
case. Here is a Bishop tried at the King's
suit, and for a Capital Crime; and yet not
tried by Commoners, but by his Peers,
and that after long debate in the House
concerning it. If it be said, that he was
tried by the Lords as Iudges in parliament,
and not as his Peers; it is answered,
1. Then Bishops are Iudges in parliament
in Cases Capital: for so this was, and
4 Bishops appointed to examine it. 2. The
Debate in the House was about Trial of
Peers by their Peers; and upon that it
was resolved, that the Archbishop should
be tried by the House. For the King designed
to have him tried in the Exchequer
for the matters objected against him, and
the steward of the King's House and Lord
Chamberlain would not suffer him to enter
into the House of Lords, till he had
put in his Answer in the Exchequer. Upon
which the great Debate arose; and
therefore the Resolution of the House is as
full a Precedent in this Case as can be desired. I do not deny, that the Rolls of parliament
of that year seem to represent the
12 Peers, as Birchington calls them, not
as appointed to examine the particular

Case of stratford; but to draw up in
form the desire of the Peers as to a Trial
by their Peers, in parliament: the which
is extant in the Record 15 Ed. III. n. 7. 
However, this Argument doth not lose
its force as to the Peerage of the Bishops;
but it is rather confirmed by it. For there
they pray the King, by the Assent of the
Prelats, Counts and Barons, that the
Peers of the Realm may not be judged
but in parliament, & per lour Piers, and
by their Peers: and after it follows, that
they may not lose their Temporalties, Lands,
Goods and Chattels, &c. Who were capable
of losing their Temporalties, but the
Prelats? Therefore this Law must respect
them as well as others. As farther
appears not onely by the Occasion, but
by the Consequent of it. For it follows,
n. 8. that the Archbishop of Canterbury was
admitted into the King's Presence, and to
answer for himself in parliamentdevant les
Piers, before his Peers: which the King
granted. so that the Rolls of parliament
put this matter beyond contradiction. In 21 R. II. Thomas Arundel, Archbishop
of Canterbury, was impeached of
High Treason before the King and
Lords in parliament. The King's answer
was, That forasmuch as this Impeachment

did concern so high a Person, & Pier de
son Roialm, (it is in the Record, but
left out in the Abridgment) and a Peer
of the Realm, the King would be advised. 
But soon after he was condemned for
Treason by the House, theProxie of the
Bishops, sir Tho. Percy, giving his Vote. 
The force of this doth not lie barely in
his being impeached before the House of
Peers in time of parliament; but that the
King called him in his Answer a Peer of
the Realm. 
      And because two Laws were already
passed, the one, that Peers were to try
none but Peers, 4 Ed. III. n. 6. the other,
that Peers were to be tried onely by their
Peers, 15 Ed. III. n. 7. the former of
these,pag. 192. the Authour of the Iurisdiction of
the House of Peers asserted (one well
known to the Authour of the Letter)
would have onely looked on as a Temporary
Order of the House. 
        Coke 2. Inst. c. 29. p. 50. sir J. M. Arg. concerning the Iurisdiction of the Peers, in skinners Case. But our greatest
Lawyers are of another opinion. And
an eminent Lawyer still living urged this
as an Act of parliament, because it is said,
that the King in full parliament assented to
it: and he added, that the words are both
Affirmative and Negative; they shall not
be bound, or charged to try any other then
Peers, but be thereof discharged; and that

therein they declare it to be against Law
for them to exercise Iurisdiction on those
who were not their Peers. From whence
it follows, that since stratford and Arundel,
Archbishops of Canterbury, were allowed
to be tried by the House of Peers,
(without Impeachment from the Commons)
they were looked on as Peers by
the whole House. The latter Act, the same Authour cannot
deny to be a binding Law; but he
hath a strange fetch to avoid the force of
it;pag. 193. 
        viz. that this Law was made with respect
to the Case of Roger Mortimer 4 Ed. III. 
and not to the Case of stratford then in Agitation:
which is without all colour of
Reason. For the Case then was of a different
nature, viz. about the Peers trying
those who were not Peers, as sir simon
Bereford, &c: but here the case was,
whether Peers should be tried by any others
then their Peers; and the King granted
they should not. Now upon this stratford
was allowed to be tried by his Peers in
parliament; and therefore this Trial upon
these Acts is an invincible Argument of
the Peerage of the Bishops. 
      In 28 H. VI. when William de la Pole,
Duke of suffolk, waved being tried by
his Peers, and submitted to the King's

Mercy;
        pag. 47. the Record saith, (as the Authour
of the Letter himself confesseth)
that Viscount Beaumont, on the behalf of
the Lordsspiritualand Temporal, and by
their advice, assent and desire, moved the
King, that a Protestation might be entered
in the parliament-Roll, that this should
not be, nor turn in prejudice nor derogation
of them, their Heirs, ne of their successours
in time coming; but that they may
have and enjoy their Liberties and Freedoms
as largely as ever their Ancestours and
Predecessours had or enjoied them before this
time. Which sir R. Cotton more briefly
expresseth, n. 52. that neither they nor
their Heirs should by this example be barred
of their Peerage. The Authour of the
Letter more fully puts in successours,
as well as Heirs; for this Protestation
was made in behalf of the Lords spiritual
as well as Temporal. But very unfairly
leaves out the most material words in the
Record, viz. [after Freedoms,] in case of
their Peerage. And I appeal to the Authour
himself, whether these words be not in
the Record; and with what ingenuity
they are left out, I cannot understand. 
I do not charge the Authour of the Letter
himself with this; but whosoever searched
the Records for him, hath dealt very

unfaithfully with him. And I suppose,
if he had seen this passage himself, he
would never have so peremptorily denied
the Peerage of the Bishops; nor asserted
with so much assurance, that they
are onely to be tried by Commoners, and
that it was always so, and never otherwise. 
      (2. ) suppose the Bishops have been
tried by Commoners out of parliament, this
doth not take away their Right of Peerage
in parliament. For all our dispute is concerning
the Right of their Peerage in parliament;
and if that be allowed, we are
not to dispute concerning the difference
that in some respects may arise by Custom,
or practice of Common Law, between
Peers by Descent, and Peers by Tenure in
Right of their Baronies. And therefore
the Authour of the Peerage of the Lords
spiritual might have spared all the needless
pains he takes about this:pag. 3, 4, &c. for we do
not contend that they have an Inheritable
Peerage, but that they are Peers in parliament,
having a Right to sit and judge
there by virtue of their Baronies. 
      But from hence he undertakes to prove,
that by Magna Charta they cannot be
Iudges of such who are ennobled in
Bloud. This comes home to our present

business, and therefore must be considered. 1. He saith,pag. 4. that he who hath onely
a Praedial or Feudal, and not Personal,
Peerage, can have no Iurisdiction but such
as is suitable to the nature of his Peerage;
and therefore can onely extend to matters
of property and possession, and not to
matters of Bloud. But that this is a very
trifling and ill-considered argument appears
by this, that he grants a Lord Keeper,
Lord Privy seal, Lord Treasurer, to
be Peers by their Offices; for, as he
speaks, after Regradation their Peerage is
ended: and he will not deny that these
may sit as Iudges in Capital Cases, although
they be Peers onely by their
Offices. Those that are Peers in parliament
have Right to judge in all Cases
that belong to the Iudicature of parliament. 
      2. He saith, that the Reason of Magna
Charta is,pag. 5. that the Iudges and Prisoner
may be under the same Circumstances. But
this kind of arguing as well excludes a
Lord Keeper, who is no Baron, as a Bishop;
and supposes that mens capacity for
Judgment depends upon perfect equality
of Circumstances: whereas Knowledge
and Integrity go farther towards constituting

one that is a Peer but in one respect,
a just Judge, then bare Inheritance
of Honour can do. But to give a full
Answer to this Argument, on which that
Authour lays so much weight, and challenges
any Person, to give a rational account
wherein the advantage of a man's being
tried by his Peers doth consist; I shall
(1) shew that this was not the Reason of
Trial by Peers; (2) give a brief account
of the true and original Reason of it. [1. ] That this was not the Reason. 
      1. Not in the Judgment of the Peers
themselves, as that Authour hath himself
sufficiently proved, when he takes so much
pains to prove p. 3. that a Writ of summons
to parliament doth not ennoble the Bloud;
and consequently, doth not put persons
into equality of Circumstances with those
whose Bloud is ennobled: and yet he
grants, that those who sate in the House of
Peers by virtue of their summons did judge
as Peers; as is manifest from his own Precedents
p. 15. from the 4 Edw. 3. From
whence it follows, that this was not
thought to be the Reason by the Peers
themselves in parliament. 2. That this was not the Reason in the
Judgment of our greatest Lawyers; because
they tell us, that where this Reason

holds, yet it doth not make men
Judges. As for instance, those who are
ennobled by Bloud, if they be not Lords
of parliament, are not to be Judges in
the case of one ennobled by Bloud. Onely
a Lord of the parliament of England,
saith Coke,
        2 Instit. p. 48. 
        shall be tried by his Peers being
Lords of parliament; and neither Noblemen
of any other Country, nor others that
are called Lords, and are no Lords of parliament,
are accounted Pares Peers within
this statute. Therefore the Parity is
not of Bloud, but of Privilege in parliament. 3. The Practice it self shews that this
was not the Reason. For this Reason
would equally hold whether the Trial be
at the King's suit, or the suit of the party:
but in the latter case, as in an appeal
for Murther, a man whose bloud is ennobled
must be tried by those whose
bloud is not ennobled;Coke 2 Instit. p. 49. selden's Titles of Honour, 4to. pag. 347. even by an Ordinary
Iury of 12 men. And I desire our
Authour to consider what becomes of the
inheritable quality of Bloud in this case,
when Life and Fortune lies at the mercy
of 12 substantial Free-holders? who, it
is likely, do not set such a value upon
Nobility as Noble-men themselves do:
and yet our Law, which surely is not against

        Magna Charta, allows an Ordinary
Iury at the suit of the party to sit in
Judgment upon the greatest Noble-men. 
Therefore this Reason can signifie nothing
against the Bishops, who are Lords
in parliament, as I have already proved. [2. ] I shall give a brief account of the
true and original Reason of this Trial by
Peers; without which, that Authour it
seems is resolved to conclude, that the
Iurisdiction of the Bishops in Capital Cases
is an abuse of Magna Charta, and a Violation
offered to the Liberties of English subjects. As to the general Reason of the Trial
by Peers, it is easie to conceive it to have
risen from the care that was taken, to
prevent any unfair proceedings in what
did concern the Lives and Fortunes of
men. From hence Tacitus observes of
the old Germans,
        De Morib. Germ. c. 12. that their Princes, who
were chosen in their great Councils to doe
justice in the several Provinces, had some
of the People joyned with them, both for
Advice and Authority. These were Assessours
to the Judges; that mens lives and
fortunes might not depend on the pleasure
of one man: and they were chosen
out of the chief of the People, none but
those who were born free being capable

of this honour. In the latter times of the
German state, before the subduing it by
Charlemagn,
        H. Mei•om. de I•mensulâ. •. 4. some learned men say, their
Iudges were chosen out of the Colleges of
Priests, especially among the saxons. After
their being conquered by him, there were
2 Courts of Judicature established among
them, as in other parts of the German
Empire. 
      1. One ordinary and Popular, viz. by
the Comites, or great Officers sent by the
Emperour into the several Districts; and
the scabini, who were Assistants to the
other, and were generally chosen by the
People. The number of these at first was
uncertain; but in the Capitulars they are
required to be seven, who were always
to assist the Comes in passing Judgments. 
But Ludovicus Pius, in his second Capitular,
A. D. 819. c. 2. enlarged their number
to 12. And if they did not come
along with him, they were to be chosen
out of the most substantial Free-holders
of the County: for the words are, De
melioribus illius Comitatûs suppleat numerum
duodenarium. This I take to be the
true Original of our Juries. For our
saxon Laws were taken very much from
the Laws of the Christian Emperours of
the Caroline Race, as I could at large

prove, if it were not impertinent to our
business; and thence discover a great
mistake of our Lawyers, who make our
ancient Laws and Customs peculiar to our
selves. As in this very case of Trial by
Peers, which was the common practice of
these parts of the World. Therefore Otto
Frisingensis takes notice of it as an unusual
thing in Hungary;
        Otto Frising. de gestis Fred. l. 1. c. 31. 
        Nulla sententia
à Principe, sicut apud nos moris est, per
pares suos exposcitur—sola sed Principis
voluntas apud omnes pro ratione habetur:
that they were not judged by their Peers, but
by the Will of their Prince. Which shews,
that this way of Trial was looked on as
the practice of the Empire, and as preventing
the inconveniences of arbitrary
Government. And it was established in
the Laws of the Lombards,
        Leg. Longobard. l. 3. tit. 8. § 4. Constit. sicil. l. 1. tit. 44. and the Constitutions
of sicily. In the one it is said
to be Iudicium Parium; in the other,
proborum virorum. In the saxon Laws of
King Ethelred at Wanting, c. 4. 12 Freemen
are appointed to be sworn to doe Iustice
among their neighbours in every Hundred. 
        Alfred. vit. l. 2. p. 72. 
Those in the Laws of Alfred are
rather 12 Compurgators then Iudges; however
some make him the Authour of the
Trial by Peers in England. But by whomsoever
it was brought into request here,

it was no other way of Trial, then what
was ordinary in other parts of Europe;
and was a great instance of the moderation
of the Government of the Northern
Kingdoms. 
      2. There was an extraordinary or Royal
Court of Iudicature: and that either
by way of Appeal, which was allowed
from inferiour Courts; or in the Causes of
Great men, which were reserved to this
supreme Court. In which either the King
himself was present, or the Comes Palatii,
who was Lord High steward; and all
the Great persons were Assessours to him. 
In such a Court Brunichildis was condemned
in France;
        Aimoin. l. 4. c. 1. and Tassilo Duke of Bavaria
in the Empire; and Ernestus, and
other Great men,
        Rhegin. l. 2. 
        A. D. 861; and Erchingerus
and Bartoldus under Conradus,
the last of the French Race. And among
the Causes expresly reserved for this supreme
Court, were those which concerned
the Prelats as well as the Nobles. 
        Capit. l. 3. c. 77. 
        Vt
Episcopi, Abbates, Comites, & potentiores
quique, si causam inter se habuerint, ac se
pacificare noluerint, ad nostram jubeantur
venire praesentiam: neque illorum contentio
aliubi judicetur. But in this Court
they challenged that as their privilege
to be tried by their Peers; who were

called Pares Curiae. 
        sigism. Orat. A. D. 1434. so the Emperour sigismund,
in his Protestation before the
states of the Empire; Cùm secundùm juris
communis dispositionem, nec non usum,
morem, stylum & consuetudinem sacri Romani
Imperii, feudalis contentio per Dominum
feudi, ac Pares Curiae terminanda
sit, &c. And again, nisi Parium nostrae
Curiae arbitrio. 
        Tilius de rebus Gal•icis. so likewise in France,
as Tilius saith, Haec judiciorum ratio, ut
de causis feudalibus judicent Feudales Pares,
        Fulbert. ep. 96. 
        in Gallia est perantiqua. so in Fulbertus
one Count sends word to another,
that their Cause should not be determined,
nisi in Conventu Parium suorum. And
many other examples might be produced:
but these are sufficient to make us
understand the true Original of this Right
of Peerage; which was from the Feodal
Laws; and all those who held of the
same Lord, and by the same Tenure, were
said to be Pares Peers. And therefore
since the Bishops in England were Barons
by Tenure ever since William I. by consequence
they were Peers to other Barons;
and had the same original Right of
Trial by other Barons as their Peers, holding
by the same Tenure, and sitting in
the same Court. And thus I hope I
have given (what that Authour so impatiently

desired, viz. ) a rational account
of the Trial by Peers; and have thereby
shewed, that this is so far from being any
disadvantage to the Bishops Cause, that
it adds very much to the Iustice of it. And that this is so far from being a violation
of Magna Charta, that it is within
the intention and meaning of it, I thus
prove. In the 14. ch. of Magna Charta
we read, Comites & Barones non amercientur
nisi per Pares suos: but by the Common
Law the Amerciament of a Bishop is
the same with that of a Lay-Baron; and
therefore in the sense of the Law, they
are looked on as Peers. And all the
parliamentary Barons, whether Bishops or
Abbots, were amerced as Barons. Thence
15 Edw. 2. a Writ was directed to the
Justices of the Common Pleas,Claus. 15 E. •. m. 12. that they
should not amerce the Abbot of Crowland
tanquam Baro, because he did not hold
per Baroniam aut partem Baroniae. And it
is confessed by the most learned Lawyers,
that the Lords spiritual do enjoy the same
legal Privileges,
        selden of Baron. p. 152. in other respects, which
the Temporal Barons do; as in real Actions
to have a Knight returned in their
Iury;
        Titles of Hon. 4 to. p. 347. 
        as to a day of Grace; hunting in
the King's Forests; scandalum Magnatum,
&c. Now since the Law of England
        
allows onely a double Parity, viz. as
to Lords of parliament, and Commons, whether
Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, or
Yeomen, without any consideration of
the great inequality of circumstances among
them; (Yeomen having as little
sense of Gentility, as Commons can have
of the privileges of Nobles;) it is apparent
that this Trial by Peers was not founded
upon equality of circumstances; and
that in all reason, those who do enjoy
the legal Privileges of Peers, are to be
looked on as such by Magna Charta. 
      But the great Objection is, that the
Lawyers are of another opinion, as to this
Trial by Peers; and not onely the common
sort, who take all upon Trust which
they find in the modern Law-Books, but
those who have searched most into Antiquity,
such as Mr. selden and sir Edw. 
Coke. 
      To this therefore I answer. 1. The Authour of the Peerage,pag. 6. &c. proves
the Bishops are not Peers, because not to be
tried by Peers. Privil. of Baronage, pag. 143. 
        This consequence Mr. selden
utterly denies; for he saith, it is true
and plain that the Bishops have been Peers. 
For which he quotes the Bishop of Winchester's
Case, who was questioned in the
King's Bench for leaving the parliament at

salisbury in the beginning of Ed. III. and he
pleaded to the declaration, quod ipse est
unus e Paribus Regni, that he was one of
the Peers of the Realm: which, he saith,
was allowed in Court. And from other
Book-cases and parliament-Rolls he there
evidently proves, that the Bishops were
Peers: which he not onely asserts in that
confused Rhapsodie, which went abroad
under his name; but in his elaborate
Work of the last Edition of his Titles of
Honour,Titles of Honour, sec. Part. ch. 5. § 32. in Marg. 
        in which he corrected and left
out the false or doubtfull passages of his
first Edition. And among the rest, that
passage wherein this Authour triumphs,
A Bishop shall not be tried by Peers in Capital
Crimes. The same thing I confess is
said in the Privileges of the Baronage; which
he there calls a point of Common Law as
it is distinguished from Acts of parliament;
i. e. the custom and practice hath been so. 
And the onely evasion he hath for Magna
Charta is this;
        pag. 153. that it is now to be interpreted
according to the current practice, and
not by the literal interpretation of the
Words. Which is an admirable answer,
if one well considers it, and justifies all
violations of Magna Charta, if once they
obtain and grow into Custom. For then,
no matter for the express words of Magna

Charta, if the contrary practice hath
been received and allowed in legal proceedings. 
This is to doe by Magna
Charta, as the Papists doe by the scriptures,
viz. make it a meer Nose of Wax,
and say it is to be interpreted according
to the Practice of the Church. 2. some things are affirmed about this
matter with as great assurance as this is,
which have not been the constant practice. 3. Instit. pag. 30. 
        Coke is positive, that Bishops are not
to be tried by their Peers; but so he is in
the same page, that a Nobleman cannot
wave his Trial by his Peers, and put himself
upon the Trial of the Countrey: Whereas
it is said in the Record 4 Ed. III. that
Thomas Lord Berkely, ponit se super Patriam,
put himself upon his Countrey, and
was tried by a Jury of 12 Knights. And
28 H. VI. the Duke of suffolk declined
the Trial of his Peers, and submitted to
the King's mercy. By which it appears,
that this was a Privilege which was not to
be denied them, if they challenged it;
but, at least before 15 Ed. III. they might
wave it if they pleased; and after that
too, if they were tried out of parliament. 
For this Trial by Peers was intended for a
security against arbitrary Power in taking
away mens Lives; and therefore it was

allowed at the King's suit, but not at
the suit of the Party. But if Bishops were
tried out of parliament, and did voluntarily
decline the challenge of this Privilege,
this is no argument at all against
their Right of Peerage: and so I find some
say it was in the Case of Fisher,Godwin. vit. Rich. scroop Archiep. Eborac. 
        Bishop of
Rochester, in H. VIII's time; which is
the great Precedent in the Law-Books. 3. The method of Proceeding as to the
Trial of Bishops by Common Iuries, while
the Pope's Power continued in England, is
not so clear, that any forcible Argument
can be drawn from thence. Because the
Bishops then looked on themselves as having
no Peers, out of parliament, in point
of Judgment, but Bishops. As in the famous
Case of Adam Bishop of Hereford,
under Edw. II. who was rescued from
the King's Bench by his Brethren the Bishops,
because they looked on his appearing
there as a Violation of the Liberties
of the Church. I do not go about to defend
these Proceedings; but I am sure
the Authour of the Peerage, &c. very
much misrepresents this business: for he
makes it as if the Bishop were legally
convicted in Court by a common Iury,
        pag. 7. and
that after conviction he was delivered to the
Archbishop, to the intent, as he supposes,

        that he should be degraded. Whereas, in
truth, the Bishops carried him out of the
Court, without his giving any Answer
to the Endictment; and when he was
absent, the King commanded the Iury to
bring in their Verdict; and without ever
being heard to make any Defence for
himself,Walsingh. pag. 119. they found him guilty in all the
Articles laid to his Charge. That Authour
very freely bestows the terms of
Impudence on the Bishops of that time,
and Ignorance on those who go about to
defend them:pag. 7. 14. but I desire to know whether
of these two makes a man thus misrepresent
a matter of fact? For it was
so far from being true, that upon Conviction
he was delivered to the Archbishop to be
degraded; that he never appeared in
Court after, but continued under the
Archbishop's care, till, after a while, he
fully reconciled him to the King; notwithstanding
the Jury found him guilty
of Treason. I desire to be informed,
whether we are to understand Magna
Charta by such a Trial as this? Whether
he were judged by his Peers, I know not;
but I am sure he was not by the Law of the
Land;
        Antiq. Cantuar. in Walt. Raynolds pag. 215. ed. Han. which I think is as good a part
of Magna Charta as the other. And this,
our Historians tell us, is the First Instance

of any Trial of this kind, of any Bishop in
England: which hath too much of force
and violence in it, to be a good Interpreter
of Magna Charta. 
      The second Precedent is verbatim out
of Mr. selden concerning Iohn de Isle,
and the Bishop of Ely his Brother; which
concerns such matters, wherein himself
confesses the Privilegium Clericale was allowed;
and the Record saith, the Archbishop
entering his plea, that he was to be
delivered to him as a member of his Church,
he was accordingly delivered, after the Jury
had given in their Verdict. Which shews,
indeed, the good will that was then used,
to take away even the allowed Privileges
of the Clergy by common Juries. And
this is another stout Interpreter of Magna
Charta; when Bracton, Briton, Fleta,
stat. West. 1. Articuli Cleri c. 15. are confessed,2. Instit. •. 633, &c. 
even by sir Edw. Coke, to be so
clear in the Clergie's behalf in these matters. The Third Precedent, which is likewise
out of the same Authour, is of
Thomas Merks, Bishop of Carlisle; who,
for his fidelity to R. II. and the true
Heirs of the Crown, against the Usurpation
of H. IV. was found guilty of Treason
by a common Iury. But Mr. selden
        
is so ingenuous as to take notice, that
the Writ directed to the Justices had in it
a Non obstante to a statute lately made
at Westminster; Licèt in stat. apud Westm. 
nuper edito inter caetera continetur, quòd
nullus Archiep. nec Episcopus coram Iusticiariis
nostris occasione alicujus criminis
impetatur, absque speciali praecepto nostro,
quousque, &c. Which was read in Court:
but the Judges urging, that the Liberties
of the Church did not extend to high Treason,
then it is said, he did ponere se super
Patriam; just as Thomas Lord Berkely
did 4 Ed. III. This is the onely Precedent
that proves that a Bishop, before
the time of H. VIII. did put himself upon
a common Iury: and yet we find as good
a Precedent of this sort, concerning an
allowed Peer of the Realm. And whether
this single Precedent be sufficient to
interpret Magna Charta, against the plain
sense of the words, and to make a constant
practice, I leave any rational man to
judge. But if this were yielded in Cases
of high Treason, wherein the Privilege
of Clergy holds not; (especially since
the statutes 25 Ed. III. c. 4. and 4 H. IV. 
c. 2, 3. ) Mr. selden tells them, that
there is no consequence from hence, because

        they are not to be tried by Peers,
therefore they are not Peers: since the
Common Law may limit this Privilege of
Peers in one particular case, which may
hold in all others. As it is no diminution
to the Peerage of the Temporal Lords,
to be tried by a common Iury at the suit
of the Party. I conclude the Answer to
this Argument,Camden. Brit. pag. 123. as Mr. Camden doth his
Discourse about this subject; who having
proved that the Bishops do enjoy
all other Privileges of Peers, except this of
being tried by them, (which he seems to
attribute to a kind of Revenge upon them,
for pleading such exemptions by the Canon-Law)
after all, he leaves it to the
Lawyers to determine, whether this be
juris explorati. The meaning of which I
am sure is not, as the Authour of the Letter
expresseth it, that it was always so,
and never otherwise. 
      But the great difficulty to some is, that
a Praedial or Feudal Barony doth not ennoble
the Bloud; and therefore can give
no Right of Peerage. Whereas it is well
known, that all the Baronies of England
were such from the Conquerour's time, till
after the Barons Wars, when, for Reason
of state, it was thought necessary to
make the Nobility more dependant on

the Crown. And all that were Barons
were Pares, i. e. Peers. so du Fresn
quotes an old Poem of the Common Laws
of England,
      Barons nous appellons les Piers
del Realm. Glossar. v. Pares. 
      In France, from whence our Baronies
first came, Ecclesiastical Persons with praedial
Baronies are thought as capable of
Peerage as any. For, there at first all the
Barones Regni (who both in France and
England were the same with the Barones
Regis, however some of late have distinguished
them) sate in the great Council,
and all publick Affairs passed through
them; and they were judged by their
own Order: and these were called Pares
Regni, among whom the Bishops were
comprehended. At last Lewis VII. A. D. 
1179. (as most Authours agree) chose
Twelve out of the great number of the
Peers of France; of which half the number
were Bishops who held feudal Baronies
of the King; and the Archbishop of
Rheims is the First of the whole Number. 
And because these enjoied greater Privileges
then other Peers, their number was
increased by particular Favour; but the
ancient Right of Peerage remained to all
the Barons of the Realm. In scotland,
        
when they appointed Twelve Peers for
the King's Council,
        Walsingh. ad A. D. 1296. Mat. Westm. A. 1295. they were 4 Bishops,
4 Earls, 4 Barons. so that in the neighbour
Nations Feodal Baronies were never
thought inconsistent with Peerage: and
we have as little Reason to think them so
with us; since to this day, the Bishops
do enjoy not onely the great Right of
Peerage, of sitting and voting in the
House of Peers, but have some personal
Privileges of Peers allowed them by the
Common Law, as is already shewed. II. The last thing to be considered is,
the Capacity in which they sit in the
House, whether as a Third Estate or not?
The Authour of the Letter not onely denies
it, but opposes it with great vehehemency,
and offers many Authorities
and Reasons against it. All which must
be weighed with the same calmness and
impartiality, which hath been hitherto
used in this Discourse. And there are
Three things to be distinctly handled for
the clearing of this Matter: 1. His Foundation;
2. His Authorities; 3. His Reasons. 
      (1. ) His Foundation whereupon he
builds;pag. 93. which is, that the Bishops sit in
the House onely in the capacity of Temporal
Barons; William the Conquerour having

brought the Temporalties of Bishops under
the condition of Baronies. That they do
sit there in the Right of their Baronies,
was yielded at first; but whether they sit
there onely in that capacity, is the thing
in Question. And here I crave leave to make use of
this Authour's distinction, and to apply
it to this purpose; viz. of the Bishops sitting
in the House in a Iudicial way, and
in the Legislative way. When they sit in
the Iudicial way, as Members of the supreme
Court of Iudicature, I grant that
they sit onely in the capacity of Temporal
Barons; as appears by the Constitution
of Clarendon, where the King requires
their attendance in Iudicature as his Barons:
But that in the Legislative way they
have a farther Capacity, as representing
a Third Estate in parliament, I prove by
these Arguments. [1. ] During the Vacancy of Bishopricks,
Writs were sent to the Guardians of the
spiritualties, to attend the parliament. 
Which Mr. selden,
        Titles of Honour, p. 2. ch. 5. n. 17. 23. who cannot be suspected
for partiality in this matter, saith,
is obvious in the Rolls of parliament; and
which he cannot deny to be an evidence
of the Bishops sitting in parliament as Bishops,
and as spiritual onely, as they did in

the saxon times, in the Wittena gemot. 
so likewise, the Vicars-general had Writs
when the Bishops were beyond sea. But
neither of these could sit in parliament as
Temporal Barons. 
      But because so much depends on the
proof of this, and no man hath yet undertaken
it, I shall bring clear Testimonies
of the constant practice of it, from
the Records of the Tower. 24 Edw. I. Writs were directed Custodi
Archiepiscopatûs Eborum, sede vacante;
& Electo Menevensi, vel ejus vices gerenti,
ipso agente in partibus transmarinis. 27 Ed. I. Custodibus Episcop. Lincoln. 
sede vacante; & Capitulo Eccles. B. P. Eborum,
Custodibus spiritual. ejusdem Dioces. 
sede vacante. 5 Ed. II. Vicario generali Archiep. Eborum,
ipso Archiepiescopo in remotis agente. 6. Ed. II. Custodi Archiepiscopatûs Cantuar. 
sede vacante. 7 Ed. II. To the same, & Custodi Episcop. 
London. sede vacante. 1 Ed. III. Custodi spiritualitatis Archiep. 
Cantuar. sede vacante: and twice the same
2 Ed. III. 
      7 Ed. III. Rex dilecto sibi in Christo

Priori Eccles. Christi Cantuar. Custodi spiritualit. 
Archiep. Cantuar. sede vacante. 10 Ed. III. Custodi spirit. Episcop. Norwic. 
sede vacante. 11 Ed. III. Custodi spirit. Episcop. Cicestr. 
sede vacante; & H. Episcopo Lincoln. 
vel ejus Vicario generali, ipso Episcopo
in remotis agente. 12 Ed. III. A more general Writ to the
Archbish. &c. vel Vicariis vestris generalibus,
vobis in partibus transmarinis agentibus. 14 Ed. III. T. Episcop. Hereford. vel
ejus Vicario generali, ipso Episcopo in remotis
agente. 20 Ed. III. Custodi spiritualit. Episcop. 
Assaphensis, &c. 
      The like we find 20 E. (3. ) 34. 36. 
38. 44. 5 R. (2. ) 6. 7. 9. 10. 12. 13. 18. 
20. 7 H. (4. ) 8. 2 H. (5. ) 3. 4. 5. 7. 8. 9. 
2 H. (6. ) 4. 5. 9. 10. 11. 15. 18. 20. 25. 29. 
12 Edw. 4. In all these years, there
are Writs directed, either to the Guardians
of the spiritualties in the Vacancies
of the sees, or to the Vicars-general
or Chancellours in their absence beyond
the seas. Which are sufficient to
prove this to have been the constant practice
of parliaments in those times. [2. ] some Church-men were summoned to

        parliament who could have no pretence
to sit there as Temporal Barons. For
49 H. III. the Deans of York, Exceter,
Wells, salisbury and Lincoln were summoned
with the like Writ as the rest. 
And Mr. selden observes,Ib. n. 22. that in the times
of Edw. I. Edw. II. Edw. III. where the
Clause Praemunientes is omitted in the
Writ to the Bishops, there particular and
several Writs were sent to some Deans
and Priors of Cathedral Churches, to appear
in parliament. 
      But to prove more fully the interest
the Clergy had then in parliaments, it is
worth our observing, that in the ancient
Records there are 4 several sorts of Writs
wherein the Clergy were concerned. 1. In the common Writs of summons
to parliament sent to the Archbishops and
Bishops, with the Clause of Praemunientes,
which runs thus; Premunientes Priorem
& Capitulum, or Decan. & Capit. 
Ecclesie vestre, Archidiaconos, totumque
Clerum vestre Dioces. facientes,
quod iidem Prior & Archidiaconi in propriis
personis suis, ac dictum Capitulum
per unum, idemque Cierus per duos Procuratores
idoneos, plenam & sufficientem
potestatem ab ipsis Capitulo & Clero habentes,
predictis die & loco intersint, ad

consentiendum hiis que tunc ibidem de
communi consilio ipsius Regni nostri,
divina favente Clementia, contigerint
ordinari. 
        Titles of Honour, p. 595. so Mr. selden represents it
from the 50 Ed. III. membr. 6. And with
him sir Edw. 
        4 Instit. p. 4. 
        Coke agrees; who saith, by
this Clause in the Writ of summons to the
Bishops, they are required to summon these
persons to appear personally at the Parlalament:
but he proves they had no Voices
there, because they are required onely ad
consentiendum, &c. Which is a very weak
argument. For, (1. ) His own great Authority,
Modus tenendi parliamentum,
saith expresly, they were called ad tractand. 
& deliberand. and that their names
were called over in the beginning of parliament;
and that they had a Voice there,
and did make up part of the Commons of
England. Not that the Procuratores Cleri
did sit together with them, after they had
a speaker of their own▪ of which I find
no Precedent: but they sate by themselves,
having a Prolocutor of their own: which
is the very same name used in the Rolls
for the speaker of the House of Commons. 
(2. ) These words do not exclude them
from being part of the commune Concilium
Regni, but onely shew, that their
Consent was required, according to the

Custom of that time. And 23 Ed. I. 
the Clause is more full, ad tract and. ordinand. 
& faciend. the like 24 Ed. I. But
in 27 Ed. I. the words are, ad faciend. &
consentiend. (3. ) The same argument
would exclude the Commons from any
Voices: for in 23 Ed. I. the Writ for
chusing Knights and Burgesses ran after
the same manner; ita quod dicti milites
plenam & sufficientem potestatem pro se
& Commun' Comit' predict' & dicti Cives &
Burgenses pro se & Communit Civit' &
Burg' tunc ibidem habeant, ad faciend'
tunc quod de communi Consilio ordinabitur
in premissis. Would any man be so
unreasonable to infer from hence, that
the House of Commons have no Votes?
The same form is used 26 Ed. I. —30 of
the same. In 5 Ed. II. it is, ad consentiendum,
&c. 6 Ed. II. it is, ad faciend. 
quod de communi Consilio contigerit ordinari. 
7 Ed. II. ad faciendum & consentiend. 
and so it continued to the 26 Ed. III. 
when first came in, ad tract and. consulend. 
faciend. but 44 Ed. I. it was onely, ad
consulend. & consentiend. 46 Ed. III. it
was, ad faciendum & consentiendum his
quae tunc de communi Concilio Regni contigerit
ordinari: so 47 Edw. III. Which
hath been the general form, ever since

observed, and would exclude the House
of Commons from any Votes in parliament,
as well as the Clergy. 
      2. There were other Writs of summons
to parliament wherein the Clause Praemunientes
was left out; and then particular
Writs were sent to such Deans and
dignified Clergy-men as the King thought
fit. so it was not onely 49 H. III. but
there were two summons 23 Ed. I. and
in one of them the Clause Praemunientes
was inserted, in the other not. It was
left out 25 Ed. I. and in one 27 Ed. I. 
and put in another, and left out again
28. and 30. of Ed. I. Inserted 1 Ed. II. 
in one Writ, and omitted in others; and
so in the 3 following years: but afterwards
generally inserted, except 6 Ed. II. 
13. 16. 18. In 5 Ed. III. it was omitted,
and so in 6. and some few years afterwards:
but then it generally obtained,
that the Clause Praemunientes was put into
the Writs of the Bishops summons to
the parliament. 3. There were Writs of summons to
great Councils, which were no Assemblies
of the Estates; and then onely some great
Bishops and Lords, or other Great men were
summoned, without any Writs to others,
or any notice taken of them. In such a

summons 2 Ed. II. onely 4 Bishops are
named; 18 Ed. II. onely 6; 19 onely 5;
2 Ed. III. onely 2. and the Guardian of the
spiritualties of the see of Canterbury: and
so 4 Ed. III. and in another the same
year, 3 besides the Archbishop of Canterbury. 
5 Ed. III. summons were sent to
the Archbishop of York, and 19 Bishops
more. 11 Ed. III. the Writ was directed
to the Archbishop of York, and such Bishops,
Earls, and Great men as were of the
King's Council: and two more were summoned
the same year. The form of the
Writ differs little from that to the parliament,
onely the Clause Praemunientes is
always left out, and onely some particular
Bishops and Nobles are called, and no
Writs for elections of Knights or Burgesses. 
In the 16 Ed. III. the Writ is sent
to the Archbishop and 7 Bishops more; but
none to Abbots, Priors, sheriffs, &c. 
Which shews that this was Magnum Concilium,
as it is sometimes called, but no
parliament. 
      4. There were Writs to summon a
Convocation distinct from the Writ of
summons to the parliament with the
Clause Praemunientes. This will appear
by the first Writ of summons to a Convocation,
which I have seen; which bears

date at Lincoln 17. Feb. 9 Ed. II. but the
parliament was summoned 16. of October
before, to meet at Lincoln in quindenâ
s. Hilarii; with the Clause Praemunientes
in the Writ to the Bishops. In which
summons to Convocation it is expressed,
that those Bishops and others of the Clergy,
who were summoned to parliament, did, as
far as they were concerned, unanimously
yield to a subsidy; but so, that others of the
Clergy who were not summoned to parliament
should meet in Convocation, and consent
thereto. Therefore the King sends his
Writ to the Archbishop to summon all the
Prelats, whether Religious or others, and
others of the Clergy of his Province, to meet
at London post 15. Pasch. ad tractand. &
consentiend. &c. Here we have the plain
difference between the Writs to parliament,
and to Convocation. The Writs to
the parliament were sent to the Archbishops
and all the Bishops, with the clause
Praemunientes, &c. summoning those of
the Clergy who were then thought necessary
to the Assembly of the Three Estates
in parliament: but when a Convocation
was called, then the Writs were onely
directed to the Two Archbishops, who
were to summon the rest of the Clergy, and
not onely those who held by Baronies,
        
but others of the dignified Clergy, tam
exemptos quàm non exemptos, with the
Proctors of the Chapters and Clergy of the
Diocese, ad tractand' & consulend' super
premissis una vobiscum & aliis per Nos
tunc mittendis. so it is expressed in the
Writ for Convocation 11 Ed. III. 29 Ed. III. 
31 Ed. III. 7 R. II. 28 H. VI. 23 Ed. IV. 
onely these two last have this difference,
ad tractand', consentiend', conclud' super
premissis, & aliis que sibi clarius exponentur
tunc ibidem ex parte nostra. 
      These things I have laid together, not
barely to clear this intricate matter, (as
it hath been made) of the interest the
Clergy then had in parliaments as well as
Convocations; but chiefly to prove from
hence, that all the interest they had in
parliaments was not meerly on the account
of the Temporal Baronies which the
Bishops and many of the Abbots then had. 
Which is the great, but common mistake
of the Authour of the Letter. 
      [3. ] After the Bishopricks were made
Baronies, the distinction even in parliament
is kept up between the several Estates
of the Clergy and Laiety. For although
Baronagium doth often take in
all; yet sometimes they are so remarkably
distinguished, that we may see they

were looked on as two distinct Estates in
parliament. so Eadmerus, (speaking of
what passed in the parliament 3 H. I)
saith, it was done utriusque Ordinis concordi
curâ & solicitudine,
        Eadmer. l. pag. 67. 
        by the consent of
both Estates. so Matt. Paris, speaking
of the summons to appear in the beginning
of H. I. comprehends all under those
2 Estates,Matt. Paris pag. 55. 
        Clerus Angliae, & Pop. universus:
and again, Respondente Clero, &
Magnatibus cunctis. speaking of a parliament
under H. II. he saith,pag. 143. 
        Convocato
Clero Regni, ac Populo. In 39 H. III. describing
a parliament, he calls those assembled
Nobiles Angliae, tam viri Ecclesiastici
quàm seculares. And in the Writs
of summons the distinction hath been always
preserved between the Praelati and
the Magnates: for in those to the Bishops
it is, cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus,
&c. in those to the Temporal Lords,
cum Praelatis, Magnatibus, &c. In those
to the Bishops they were commanded, in
Fide & Dilectione quibus nobis tenemini:
in those to the Temporal Lords, in Fide
& Homagio; or, since Ed. III. in Fide
& Ligeancia. Which shews that they
were not summoned meerly as Temporal
Barons. 
      [4. ] The Authour of the Letter confesseth

        the Clergy to be one of the three Estates of
the Kingdom;
        pag. 86. but denies them to be one
of the three Estates in parliament. From
whence I argue thus. Either the Clergy
must be represented in parliament, or
one of the Estates of the Kingdom is not
at all represented there. And if one of
the Estates of the Kingdom be not there
represented, how can it be a perfect Representative?
so that this distinction of
the Three Estates of the Kingdom, and
the Three Estates in parliament, unavoidably
overthrows the parliament's being
a compleat Representative. But in
23 H. VIII. n. 33. as Mr. Petyt observes,
there is this passage in the parliament-Rolls. 
It is considered and declared by the
whole Body of this Realm,
        The ancient Right of the Commons, pag. 61. 
        now represented
by all the Estates of the same assembled
in this present parliament. 
Therefore all the Estates of the Kingdom
must be represented in parliament. And
1 Eliz. c. 3. The Lords spiritual and
Temporal and the Commons are said to
represent in parliament the Three Estates
of the Realm. From whence it
follows, that, according to the sense of
the parliament, if the Clergy be an Estate
of the Kingdom, as he saith they are,
they must be represented in parliament,

or the whole Body of the Realm cannot
be there represented. (2. ) We now come to consider the
weight of Authority in this matter. For
which I shall premise two things. 1. That the whole parliament assembled
are the best Judges, which are the
Three Estates in parliament; and their Authority
is more to be valued, then that of
any particular Persons, whether Lawyers,
or others. 2. That no parliaments can give better
Testimony in this matter, then those
which have assumed most to themselves. 
For if there be Three Estates in parliament,
and the Bishops be none, then the
King must be one of the Three; as the
Authour of the Letter insinuates, throughout
this discourse: and the natural consequence
from hence seems to be a coordination;
or that two joyning together
may over-rule the third. Therefore in all
Reason, if any parliaments would have
made the King one of the Three Estates,
it would have been either the parliament
1 H. IV. which deposed one King, and set
up another; or that 1 R. III. which disinherited
the Children of Ed. IV. and set
up their Uncle. I shall therefore first from the Rolls of

these two parliaments shew, which are
the Three Estates in parliament; and
from them, evidently prove that the
King is none, but the Bishops are the
Third Estate. 
      I begin with the parliament 1 H. IV. 
By the Rolls it appears, (1. ) That R. II. 
appointed two Procurators to declare his
Resignation of the Crown, coram omnibus
statibus Regni, before all the states
of the Kingdom. 
        From whence it unavoidably
follows, 1. that the King was
none of them; 2. that the Estates of the
Kingdom and the Estates in parliament
are the same thing. (2. ) Among the Articles
against R. II. one is concerning the
Impeachment of Tho. Archbishop of Canterbury
coram Rege & omnibus statibus
Regni, before the King and all the Estates
of the Realm. The King then was none
of the Estates. (3. ) The Commissioners for
the sentence of Deposition are said to
be appointed per Pares & Proceres
Regni Anglie spirituales & Temporales,
& ejusdem Regni Communitates,
omnes status ejusdem Regni
representantes; by the Peers and
Lords spiritual and Temporal, and the
Commons of the Kingdom, representing all
the states of the Kingdom. 
        Where observe,

1. The Bishops are called Peers, as
well as the Temporal Lords. 2. The Estates
of the parliament are to represent all
the Estates of the Kingdom. 3. The
Three Estates in parliament are the Lords
spiritual, the Lords Temporal, and the
Commons of the Realm; and Fabian expresly
calls them the Three Estates of this
present parliament,
        Fabian. 7. par. R. 2. s•l. 158. representing the whole
Body of the Realm. In the Rolls of parliament 1 R. III. it is
recorded, that before his Coronation, certain
Articles were delivered unto him in the
name of the Three Estates of the Realm of
England, that is to say, of the Lords spiritual
and Temporal and of the Commons by
name, &c. Now forasmuch as neither the
said Three Estates, neither the said Persons
which in their name presented and delivered
(as it is afore said) the said Roll unto our
said sovereign Lord the King, were assembled
in form of parliament, divers
Doubts have been moved, &c. Now by
the said Three Estates assembled in this
present parliament, and by Authority of the
same, be ratified, and enrolled, &c. Upon
which Mr. Pryn himself makes this Marginal
Note,
        Abridgment of Records, pa. 710. 714. The Three Estates must concurr
to make a parliament; no one or two of them
being a full or real parliament, but all conjoyned. 
But lest I should seem to take advantage
onely of these two parliaments, I
shall now shew this to have been the constant
sense of the parliaments; as will appear
by these following Records. 
      In 1 H. VI. n. 12. All the Estates of the
Realm are said to be assembled in parliament. 
3 H. VI. n. 19. the Three Estates
assembled in this present parliament. 6 H. VI. n. 24. the Duke of Gloucester
desired an explanation of his Power as
Protector: in the Answer, drawn up by
the Lords appointed for that purpose, it
is alledged that H. V. could not by his last
Will, nor otherwise, alter, change, or abroge,
without the Assent of the Three
Estates; nor commit or grant, to any Person,
Governance or Rule of this Land,
longer then he lived. Nevertheless they
adde, It was advised and appointed by
the Authority of the King, assenting the
Three Estates of this Realm. Which
shews how far the King was from being
thought one of the Three Estates in parliament
at that time. 10 H. VI. n. 17. Ralph Lord Cromwell
put in a Petition to the parliament, that
he was discharged the Office of King's
Chamberlain in a way contrary to the Articles
for the Council sworn 8 H. VI. coram

tribus Regni statibus,
        before the Three
Estates of the Realm, as they were assembled
in parliament: which appears by
the Record 8 H. VI. n. 27. 11 H. VI. n. 10. The Duke of Bedford
appeared in parliament, and declared the
Reasons of his coming coram Domino
Rege & tribus Regni statibus, before
the King and the Three Estates of the
Realm; as it is in the Record, but not
mentioned in the Abridgment. 
      n. 11. Domino Rege & tribus Regni
statibus in presenti parliamento existentibus,
the King and the Three Estates of
the Realm being present in parliament. Nothing
can be plainer, then that the King
is none; and that the Three Estates of
the Kingdom are the Three Estates in parliament. 11 H. VI. n. 24. Lord Cromwell Treasurer
exhibits a Petition in parliament,
wherein he saith, the estate and necessity
of the King and of the Realm have been
notified to the Three Estates of the
Land assembled in parliament. 
      In an Appendix annexed to the Rolls
of parliament that year, the Duke of Bedford
saith, in his Petition to the King,
how that in your last parliament yit liked
your Highness, by yadvis of Three

Estates of his Land, to will me, &c. 
      23 H. VI. n. 11. Presente Domino Rege,
& tribus Regni statibvs in presenti
parliamento existentibus, &c. 
      28 H. VI. n. 9. Domino Rege & tribus
Regni statibus in pleno parliamento
comparentibus, &c. 
      After these I shall insist upon the Precedents
cited by the Authour of the Letter
himself;pag. 86. 
        viz. the Ratification of the Peace
with France by the Thrée Estates 9 H. V. 
and 11 H. VII. which he alledges as an
extraordinary thing, that the Three Estates
joyned in these Transactions: whereas in
truth it was nothing but a Ratification of
the Peace in parliament; and consequently,
those Three Estates of the Kingdom,
are the Three Estates of parliament. 
        Bacon H. 7. pag. 144. For
the parliament was then sitting at both
these Ratifications; and no other Assembly
of the Thrée Estates was ever known
in England. 
        Hist. Angl. pag. 404. 
        Walsingham saith, that H. V. 
called aparliament, which was sitting at
that time: for the King kept s. George's
Feast at Windsor that year, from thence
he went to the parliament at London,
which ended within a Month; and the
Ratification of the Peace bears date
May 2. Judge then, whether these were
not the Three Estates in parliament? But

to prove this more fully. It seems by
23 H. VI. n. 24. that a statute was made
in the time of H. V. that no Peace should
be made with France without the consent
of the Three Estates of both Realms; which
was then repealed. But whom they
meant by the Thrée Estates here in the
time of H. VI. appears by 28 H. VI. 
n. 9. when the Chancellour, in the presence
of the King, gave thanks to the Three
Estates, and prorogued the parliament:
where it is plain, the Three Estates in
parliament were meant, and that the King
could be none of them. In 38 H. VI. 
n. 38. . the Chancellour again, in the presence
of the King and of the Three Estates,
having given thanks to all the Estates, dissolved
the parliament. But that which puts
this matter out of doubt is, that in the
parliament 1 H. VI. the Queen Dowager
in her Petition mentions the Ratification
made in parliament 9 H. V. and saith, it
was not onely sworn by the King, but
by the Thrée Estates of the Kingdom of
England: Cest assavoir, les Prelatz,
Nobles, & Grands, & per les Comuns
de mesm le Roialm Dengleterre;that
is to say, by the Prelats, Nobles, and other
Grandees, and by the Commons of the
Realm of England: as appears more fully,

saith that Petition, by the Records and
Acts of the said parliament. And the King
there declares in four several Instruments,
that the said Articles of Peace were approved
and ratified by Authority of parliament,
in these words; Qui quidem
Pax, Tractatus, conclusio & concordia,
omnesque Articuli contenti in eisdem, in
parliamento dicti Patris nostri apud
Westm. 20 die Maii A. R. 9. tento,
Auctoritate ejusdem parliamenti approbati,
laudati, auctorizati & acceptati. 
Nothing can be plainer from hence, then
that the Three Estates of the Kingdom
were no other then the Three Estates in
parliament. And the same appears by another
Petition of the same Queen, 2 H. VI. 
n. 19. For latter Times I shall instance onely
in the parliament 1 Eliz. c. 3. wherein the
Lords spiritual and Temporal and Commons
declare, that they do represent in parliament
the Thrée Estates of the Realm. 
From whence it follows, 1. That the
Three Estates of the Kingdom must be represented
in parliament. 2. That the
Lords spiritual and Temporal and the
Commons do represent those Three Estates
of the Kingdom, and therefore are the
Three Estates in parliament. 3. That the

        King can be none of the Estates in parliament,
because he doth not represent any
of the Estates of the Kingdom. 
      And it is a wonder to me, that any
man, who considers the Constitution of
the Government of Europe, and how agreeable
it was in all the Kingdoms of
it, as to the Assemblies of the Three Estates,
could ever take the King to be one of
the Three Estates in parliament. For the
Question would seem ridiculous to persons
of any other Nation, if we should
ask them whether the King was reckoned
among the tres Ordines Regni? For by
the Three Estates they all mean the Three
Ranks of men, the Clergy, Nobility, and
Commonalty. 
        pag. 88. But the Authour of the Letter
could not deny that these were the
Three Estates of the Kingdom; but he
saith, the Three Estates of parliament are
clean another thing: which I may reasonably
suppose, is sufficiently disproved
by the foregoing Discourse. But he quotes several Authorities for
what he saith, which must now be examined,
and will appear to be of no
weight, if compared with the evidence
already given on the other side. The first Authority is of King Iames,pag. 98. in
his speech at the Prorogation of the parliament

1605. wherein he saith, the parliament
consists of a Head, and a Body; the
King is the Head, the Body are the Members
of the parliament. This Body is subdivided
into two parts, the Vpper, and the
Lower House. The Vpper consists of the
Nobility and the Bishops; the Lower of
Knights and Burgesses. The force of the
Argument lies in King Iames his making
the Bishops but a Part of the Vpper House:
but that this doth not exclude their being
a Third Fstate, I prove by a Parallel
Instance. In 5 H. IV. the Bishop of London,
being Chancellour, compared the parliament
to a Body, as King Iames did; but
he made the Chùrch the Right Hand, the
Temporal Lords the Left Hand, and the
Commonaltie the other Members; yet
presently after, he calls these, the several
Estates which the King had called to parliament. 
But that the Bishops sitting in
the same House with the Temporal Lords
doth not hinder their being a distinct
Estate, will appear, when we come to
answer his Reasons. And for King Iames
his sense as to this matter, we may fully
understand it by this passage in his Advice
to his son. Basilic. Dor. l. 2. p. 159. of his Works. As the whole subjects of our
Countrey (by the ancient and fundamental
Policy of our Kingdom) are divided into

Three Estates, &c. These words are spoken
of the Kingdom of scotland; but the
ancient and fundamental Policy of that is
the same with England; and he that believed
the subjects made the Three Estates
there, could never believe the King to
be one of them here. 
      The next Authority is of King Charles I. 
        pag. 100. 
        in his Answer to the 19 Propositions Iune 2. 
1642. wherein he tells the two Houses, that
neither one Estate should transact what is
proper for two, nor two what is proper for
three. To which I answer, that the Penner
of that Answer was so intent upon the
main business, viz. that the two Houses
could doe nothing without the King, that
he did not go about to dispute this matter
with them, whether the King were one
of the Three Estates or not; but taking
their supposition for granted, he shews
that they could have no Authority to act
without the King's concurrence. But the
unwary Concessions in that Answer were
found of dangerous consequence afterwards,
when the King's enemies framed
the Political Catechism out of them; which
is lately reprinted, no doubt, for the good
of the People. In 2 H. IV. n. 32. pag. 101. he makes the House
of Commons to declare to the King and

Lords, that the Three Estates of the parliament
are the King, the Lords spiritual,
and Temporal. Whereas the truth of that
matter is this: A difference had happened
in the House of Lords, between the Earl
of Rutland and Lord Fitz-Walter; whereupon
the House of Commons go up to the
King and the Lords, and having, it seems,
an Eloquent speaker, who ventured upon
dangerous Metaphors, he makes bold with
the similitude of the Trinity; because that
would help him to perswade them to Vnity:
but if he had left the King out, he
might have been suspected to have set up
an Independent Power in the Three Estates:
therefore lest he should lose his similitude,
(which goes a great way with an eloquent
man) he strains another point,
and draws the King into his Trinity. And
is such an expression to be mentioned in
comparison with the express Declaration
but the year before, 1 H. IV. of both
Houses concerning the Three Estates in
parliament?
      Next to this similitude, that of stephen
Gardiner ought to be mentioned; who
compared Faith, Hope, and Charity, concurring
to Iustification, to the concurrence
of the Three Estates in parliament, i. e. the
King and two Houses, to the making of

Laws. But I wonder the Authour of the
Letter, who expresseth so much dislike
of his Divinity, would take his Iudgment
in Politicks. But this notion of
making the King one of the Three Estates,
how valuable soever it be to some men, is,
it seems, onely to be met with in some grave
ancient similitudes. But of what Authority
these are, against the constant sense
of parliaments so fully declared, I leave
any man of understanding to judge. For the judgment of eminent Lawyers,
        pag. 103. 
he quotes but one in King Iames his
time, viz. Finch in his Book of Law, l. 2. 
ch. 1. who doth indeed, in the words quoted
by him, make the King, Lords and
Commons to be the Three Estates. But I
can hardly imagine how a learned Lawyer
could fall into such a gross mistake,
unless the Modus tenendi parliamentum
should give the occasion to it; which was
accounted no blind Ms. in those days,
but a very great Treasure, as appears by
sir E. Coke, who cites it on all occasions. 
And very few Lawyers had the judgment
in Antiquity which Mr. selden had, who
first discovered the just Age and Value of
that Ms. This Authour indeed, towards
the conclusion of his Treatise, makes the
King the first of the Estates: but then he

makes six Estates in parliament, or Degrees,
as he calls them; and delivers this
for good doctrine at the very end of his
Treatise, that if any one of all these be summoned,
and do not appear, yet, with him,
it is notwithstanding a full parliament: nay,
he expresly saith, the King may hold a
parliament without a House of Lords. But
there are so many other such Positions discovered
by others in that Treatise, that I
need to say no more of it. And as to this
point of the King's being one of the Estates
in parliament, sir Ed. Coke, who otherwise
too much admired that Treatise,
declares against it, in the very beginning
of his Treatise of the parliament. This
Court, saith he, consisteth of the King's Majesty,
sitting there as in his Royal Politick
capacity; and of the Three Estates of the
Realm; viz. of the Lords spiritual, Archbishops
and Bishops, the Lords Temporal,
and the Commons of the Realm. And
however the Authour of the Letter may
slight Mr. selden's Judgment in this matter;pag. 86. 
yet these two may be sufficient to
weigh down the scales against any one
Lawyer's Authority to the contrary; especially,
since they were never suspected, I
dare say, for any partiality towards the
Clergy. 
      
(3. ) But the Authour of the Letter
thinks to carry this point by meer strength
of Reason. We must therefore diligently
consider the force of his Arguments. 1. If Bishops were one of the Estates in
parliament,
        pag. 89. 
        Reason would they should vote
by themselves separately from other Lords,
which would make another Estate: But
they do not onely not vote apart by themselves,
the whole Body of them together;
but that Body is divided and separated
within it self, one part from another. If
both Houses ever sate together, as some
imagine, (and as they do in a neighbour
Kingdom,) this way of Reasoning
will make but one Estate in parliament all
that time. But to give a clear answer to
this objection; I distinguish two things
in the Bishops, their spiritual Capacity, by
which they represent; and their Civil Capacity
as Barons, in which they vote, according
to the Rules of the House. For,
the manner of giving their Votes is a thing
under the Regulation of the House, and
depends upon Custom; but their spiritual
Capacity as Bishops, in which they represent,
doth not. And the Reason of
their sitting together with other Lords, is
upon the account of their Writs of summons;
which, as Mr. selden confesseth,

ever since the latter end of Edw. III. hath
been, for the Bishops cum ceteris Prelatis,
Magnatibus & Proceribus, colloquium
habere & tractatum: and therefore
they are bound to sit together in the same
place with the Temporal Lords, or else
they cannot advise and confer together. 
And I leave the Authour of the Letter to
consider, whether his Reason, or the King's
Writ, ought to take place. 2. If the Bishops were a Third Estate,
        pag. 89. 
        they must have a Negative voice to all that
passeth there: But the Bishops are intermingled
with the Temporal Lords in making
up the Majority, as a part of it. since
I have evidently proved the Clergy to be
one of the Three Estates in parliament,
if he be sure that every Estate ought to
have a Negative voice, then I am sure that
this Objection lies more upon him to answer,
then upon the Bishops. But to
prevent any new disputes, I shall return
this Answer to it. since it is agreed on
both sides, that the Bishops do sit in the
House as Temporal Barons, and in that respect
do make up the Majority of Votes in
the House of Lords; it could not but
seem unreasonable, that they who voted
as Barons in the House should have a Negative
voice in another capacity: and by

this means they lost their distinct Negative
voice, because by the King's Writs
they were to sit and vote with the Temporal
Lords. Just as it is in the Diets of
Germany: since the distribution of that
Assembly of the Estates of the Empire into
the several Chambers, the Prelates vote
according to their Ranks: the Three Electors
in the Electoral College; the other Bishops,
that are Princes of the Empire, in
the Chamber of Princes; and those who
are not Princes, with the Counts and Barons. 
so that here the Votes of the Bishops
are mingled with the rest, without
a distinct Negative voice; and yet no one
questions but the Bishops do represent a
distinct Estate of the Empire. 
      3. This is a disparagement to the House
of Lords,
        pag. 90. 
        that another Estate must be
joyned with them to make up their Negative. 
No more, then to the Princes
of the Empire, to have the Bishops
joyned with them, when the Imperial Cities
vote by themselves. But what disparagement
is this, for those to make up
the Majority of the Votes of the Baronage,
who sit there as Barons by Tenure, by a
Right as ancient as Will. the Conquerour,
by the Authour's own confession?4. If the Bishops make a Third Estate,pag. 91. 
        
then a parliament could not be held without
them: But a parliament hath sate excluso
Clero, as that of Ed. I; and that it may do
so in point of Law, appears by the Resolution
of the Iudges in Keilway's Reports,
because the Bishops sit in parliament by reason
of their Baronies. This is the great Objection,
to which I shall give a full Answer. 
      [1. ] It is dangerous arguing from extraordinary
Cases to the excluding any
one of the Estates of the Kingdom from
being represented in parliament: because
no one can tell where this way of arguing
will stop. If a parliament may be good
without one Estate, why not without another?
And we have seen an House of
Lords excluded as unnecessary, upon such
kind of arguments; because they sit in
their own Persons, and represent none but
themselves. If we once depart from the
ancient and legal Constitution of parliaments,
there will be no end of Alterations. 
Every new Modeller of Government
hath something to offer that looks
like Reason, at least to those whose interest
it is to carry it on. And if no Precedents
can be found, then they appeal to
a certain invisible thing called the Fundamental
Contract of the Nation: which being
a thing no where to be found, may

signify what any one pleaseth. suppose
one extraordinary case happens through
the disorder of Times, that the Clergy have
been left out in a parliament; what doth
this signify towards altering the legal Constitution
and constant Course of parliaments,
which from the beginning of parliaments
in this Nation, have had the Estate
of the Clergy represented in them?
as sufficiently appears by Mr. Petyt's learned
Preface to his late Discourse of the
ancient Right of the Commons. 
        pag. 7, &c. The first
after King Ethelbert's Conversion was,
Commune Concilium tam Cleri quàm Populi. 
That under Ina was, omnium Episcoporum,
& Principum, Procerum Comitum, &
omnium sapientum seniorum & Populorum
totius Regni. That under Edmund the
Elder was, Concilium magnum Episcoporum,
Abbatum, Fidelium Procerum &
Populorum. I might adde many more:
as that at Becanceld under King Withred
A. D. 694. Concil. Brit. p. 182. 189. 318. 327. 336. 340. 344. 428. 534. 
        Episcopis, &c. Ducibus & satrapis
in unum glomeratis. At Clovesho
under Kenulphus of Mercia; at Calecyth,
at London, at Kingston. Nay, not one
can be found by me in the saxon times,
wherein the Bishops are not expresly mentioned. 
so that if there be such a thing
to be found as the Fundamental Contract

of the Nation about the Constitution of
parliaments, I do not question but they
have their share in it. Insomuch that
sir H. spelman makes it his description of
the Wittena-Gemot, that in it, as Mr. Petyt
observes, Convenêre Regni Principes,
tam Episcopi quàm Magistratus, liberique
homines; i. e. it was an Assembly of the
Three Estates. so that before there were
any such things as Baronies, they were
an essential part of the English parliament. 
And must all this clear and undoubted
evidence from the first mention of parliaments
be rejected, because once upon a
time, a certain King called a certain parliament,
wherein, upon some Distast between
the King and the Clergy, the other
Estates continued sitting without them?[2. ] This single Instance about the parliament
under Ed. I. is much misunderstood,
as will appear by these considerations. 1. That the Clergy excluded themselves,
and were not shut out by the Act of the
King and the other Estates. For upon
the Bull of Pope Boniface VIII. forbidding
the Clergy giving any more subsidies,
(which was procured by Archbishop
Winchelsee, as our Historians relate) a
parliament being called by Ed. I. at saint
Edmondsbury on purpose for subsidies, the

Clergy refuse, upon the Pope's prohibition,
till they had consulted the Court of Rome;
and go away every one to their own homes:
notwithstanding which, the King proceeds
with the other two Estates, and
gets subsidies from the Laiety. so that
the exclusion of the Clergy came from their
own voluntary Act; when the King desired
no such thing, nor the other two Estates,
but were all extremely provoked
at this withdrawing of the Clergy. 
That this parliament was called purposely
for the subsidy, appears by the Writ still
upon Record; wherein the Archbishop
is summoned to appear,Claus. 24 Ed. 1. M. 7. dorso. 
        ad ordinandum
de quantitate & modo subsidii memorati. 
      2. Whereas it is insinuated, that great
matters were done, and good Laws passed,
when the Clergy were excluded; I find no
such thing. It is true, the confirmation
of Magna Charta by Ed. I. (which was a
great thing indeed) is said, in the statute-Books,
to be done the same year, viz. 
25 Ed. I. But that it could not be done
in that parliament, I thus prove. That
parliament was called crast. 
        Walsingh. pag. 18. Thorn. ad A. 1296. Knighton, p. 2491. Matt. West. pag. 428. Animarum;
the King appoints another at London crast. 
Hilarii: where the difference still continuing,
he appoints a new parliament on
the day of s. Peter ad Vincula, or Lammasday,
        
wherein he was reconciled to the
Archbishop and Clergy. Then Fealty is
sworn to his son, before his going into
Flanders; and the King excused himself
as to the great Taxes and subsidies, on the
account of his Wars. While he was about
Winchelsea, a Remonstrance is sent to
him of the Grievances of the Nation, in
the name of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls,
Barons, and the whole Commons of England,
wherein they complain of illegal
Taxes, and the breach of Magna Charta. 
The King gives a dilatory answer, and
passes over into Flanders. In his absence
the People refuse to pay the Taxes, and
the Lords combine together, and all
things tend to an open Rebellion. His
son Ed. II. calls a parliament at London,
and promises a Confirmation of the
Charter, and that no Taxes should hereafter
be raised, either on Clergy or Laiety,
without their consent. Which being sent
over, Edw. I. confirmed it with his own
seal: which was all done within the
compass of this year. But he again ratified
it in the parliament 27 Ed. I. so
that nothing was done in that parliament
at s. Edmondsbury, but granting a 12th
        of the Laiety to the King. And when the
great Laws were passed, the King and

Clergy were reconciled, and they sate in
parliament. And the Archbishop of Canterbury
fell into the King's displeasure afterwards,
for being so active a promoter
of them. The summe then of this mighty
argument is, that the Lords and Commons
once granted their own subsidies, without
the concurrence of the Clergy; therefore
the Clergy are no essential part of the parliament. 
      3. The Reason assigned in Keilway's
Reports, why the King may hold a parliament
without the Bishops, is very insufficient:pag. 92. 
        viz. because they have no place in
parliament by reason of their spiritualty, but
by reason of their Temporal possessions. The
insufficiency of which Reason will appear
by two things. 1. That it is not true: as appears by
this, that the Clergy are one of the Estates
of the Kingdom; and all the Estates of the
Kingdom must be represented in parliament. 2. Were it true, it is no good Reason. 
For why may they be excluded because
they sit on the account of their Baronies?
Where lies the force of this Reason? Is
it because there will be Number enough
without them? That was the Rump's
Argument against the secluded Members. 
        
And I hope the Authour of the Letter will
not justify their Cause. Or is it because
they hold their Baronies by Tenure? so
did all the ancient Barons of England:
and why may the King hold his parliament
with the other Barons, without the Bishops;
and not as well with the Bishops,
without the other Barons? Which I do
not see how it can be answered upon
those grounds. suppose the Question
had been thus put, since all the ancient
Lords of parliament were Barons by Tenure,
and parliaments were held for many
Ages without any Barons by Patent or by
Writ, why may not the King hold his
parliament after the ancient way, onely
with Barons by Tenure? I do not see,
but as good a Reason may be given for
this, as that in Keilway's Reports. All that
I plead for is, that our good ancient and
legal Constitution of parliament may not
be changed for the sake of any single
Precedents, and rare Cases, and obscure
Reports built upon weak and insufficient
Reasons. pag. 68. For, as the Authour of the
Letter very well saith, Consuetudo parliamenti
est Lex parliamenti, The constant
Practice of parliaments (and not one single
Instance) is the Law of parliaments. 
And suppose that Precedent of 25 Ed. I. 

as full as could be wished in this case; yet
I return the answer of the Authour of the
Letter in a like case,pag. 49. 
        This is but one single
Precedent, (of a parliament without Bishops,)
against multitudes wherein they
were present: it was once so, and never but
once. And can that be thought sufficient
to alter and change the constant course and
practice of parliaments, which hath been
otherwise?
      Nothing now remains, but a severe
reflexion on the Popish Bishops for opposing
the statute of Provisors,
        pag. 96. 
        and the several
good Acts for the Reformation. But what
this makes against the Votes of Protestant
Bishops is hard to understand. If he
thinks those could not make a good Third
Estate in parliament, who took Oaths to
the Pope contrary to their Allegeance, and
the interest of the Nation, so do we. If
he have a great zeal for the Reformation,
so have all true Members of the Church of
England, who, we doubt not, will heartily
maintain the Cause of our Church against
the Vsurpations of Rome, though
the heat of others should abate. For did
not our Protestant Bishops seal the Reformation
with their Bloud, and defend it
by their admirable Writings? What
Champions hath the Protestant Religion
        
ever had to be compared in all respects
with our Cranmer, •idley, Iewel, Bilson,
Morton, Hall, Davenant, and many other
Bishops of the Church of England? And
notwithstanding the hard fortune Archbishop
Laud had in other respects, not to be
well understood in the Age he lived in;
yet his enemies cannot deny his Book to be
written with as much strength and judgment
against the Church of Rome, as any other
whatsoever. I shall conclude with
saying, that the Clergy of the Church of
England have done incomparably more
service against Popery, from the Reformatition
to this day, then all the other Parties
among us put together: And that the
Papists at this time wish for nothing more,
then to see men, under a pretence of Zeal
against Popery, to destroy our Church; and
while they cry up Magna Charta, to invade
the legal Rights thereof, and thereby
break the first Chapter of it; and from
disputing the Bishops presence in Cases Capital,
to proceed to others; and so by degrees
to alter the ancient Constitution of our parliaments,
which will unavoidably bring Anarchy
and Confusion upon us: from which,
as well as Popery, Good Lord, deliver us. 
      THE END. "
